# A-a gradient

Difference between alveolar (calculated using **alveolar gas equation**)
and arterial (measured) partial pressures of oxygen. Normally 1kPa for
every 25 years of life.

# Abdominal compartment syndrome

A sustained intra-abdominal pressure of &gt;20mmHg in association with a
new organ dysfunction is diagnostic. &gt;12mmHg is abnormal
(intra-abdominal hypertension). Normal pressure is 5-7mmHg. Occurs
following laparotomy, trauma, and any condition associated with oedema.

# Acceleration

**Acceleration** = force/mass

# Acetylcholine receptors (AChR)

**Acetylcholine receptors (AChR)**

Muscarinic - G-protein coupled. Present at organ

Nicotinic - ligand-gated Na+ channel. 3 types of nicotinic AChR: muscle,
ganglionic, and neuronal.

5 subunits:

α, β, α, δ, ε in adults - high conductance, short duration

α β α γ δ in foetus - low conductance, long duration

# Acid-base - rules of thumb for compensation

To predict the change in HCO3<sup>-</sup> expected due to metabolic
compensation:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Acute respiratory acidosis:</td>
<td>ΔHCO3<sup>-</sup> = 1mM for each 1kPa change in PCO2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Acute respiratory alkalosis:</td>
<td>ΔHCO3<sup>-</sup> = 2mM for each 1kPa change in PCO2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Chronic respiratory acidosis:</td>
<td>ΔHCO3<sup>-</sup> = 4mM for each 1kPa change in PCO2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Chronic respiratory alkalosis:</td>
<td>ΔHCO3<sup>-</sup> = 3mM for each 1kPa change in PCO2</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\[Baillie, J.K. *Thorax* **63** , 289-290(2008).\]

# Acromegaly

Caused by eosinophilic pituitary ademona. Airway mucosa not longer but
thicker. Subglottic stenosis common. Diabetes and hypertension are
features.

# Active transport

Compounds are moved against a concentration gradient, with the
consumption of energy.

# Adrenaline

**Adrenaline** See **catecholamines.** Memorise the cardiac arrest dose
in kids: 10μg/kg. It is easiest to give 1ml from a minijet for every
10kg of body weight.

1 in 1000 = 1mg/ml

1 in 10,000 = 100μg/ml (Minijet concentration)

1 in 100,000 = 10μg/ml

# Adrenoreceptors

**Adrenoreceptors** are all **G-protein-coupled.**

(See **catecholamines**.)

# Airway examination

**Airway examination** aims to predict difficult airway management. Five
separate factors are considered:

1. Face mask ventilation (neck flexion, head extension, sunken cheeks,
beard)

2. Laryngeal mask insertion (mouth opening)

3. Direct laryngoscopy (see below)

4. Tracheal intubation (laryngeal oedema, tracheal stenosis)

5. Emergency cricothyroidotomy (obesity / cancer / haematoma / previous
surgery/radiotherapy)

6. Extubation (oedema, tracheomalacia, tracheal stenosis (eg. Down's,
acromegaly, thyroidectomy))

Difficult direct laryngoscopy is predicted by:

Mallampati test

Thyromental distance (Patil test)

Overbite scale - A- easy B- in line C - can't overbite.

Mouth opening - less than two fingers - tricky

# Airway fire

**Airway fire** is rare but usually fatal. Stop ventilation, turn off
oxygen, remove ETT. (xxx)

# Aldosterone

**Aldosterone** See **steroid hormones, RAAS.**

# Alkaline phosphatase

**Alkaline phosphatase** is released from liver and bone. It may be
normal in acute liver failure. (see **jaundice** ).

# Alloimmunisation

**Alloimmunisation** is common in patients who have received multiple
**blood transfusions** . Circulating antibodies to Rhesus, Kell, Lewis,
Duffy and Kidd antigens make cross-matching difficult. Blood products
(even platelets) given to Rhesus negative women of child-bearing age
should always be Rhesus-negative.

# Amide

**Amide** a type of chemical bond. Common structure CO.NH2

# Amniotic fluid embolus

Caused by amniotic fluid entering uterine veins. Meconium-stained
amniotic fluid creates a worse reaction.

Massive inflammatory stimulus delivered directly to blood. Presentation
is usually with hypoxia, hypotension, or DIC. Progresses to diffuse
intravascular activation of innate immune response, causing organ
failure.

# Anaesthesia

**Anaesthesia** is defined as induction of unconsciousness, or more
broadly as unresponsiveness to stimuli. Hypnosis, amnesia and analgesia
are considered separate components of this effect.

# Anaphylaxis

**Anaphylaxis** Type I **hypersensitivity** reaction. Top causes under
anaesthesia:

# Angina

**Angina** classification: see **cardiovascular risk** .

# Angiotensin II

**Angiotensin II**

Angiotensinogen → AG I → AGII

Aldosterone

Pathological/pharmacological: vasoconstriction

# Anion Gap

**Anion Gap** = (Na+ + K+) - (Cl- + HCO3-). NR 8-12mmol/l but normal AG
is less if albumin or phosphate low. Normal AG = 0.2\*Alb (g/l) +
1.5\*PO4-(mmol/l).

# Ankle block

**Ankle block** targets five nerves: sural, superficial and deep
peroneal, saphenous, tibial.

<img src="images/image001.jpg" width="400" />

# Antibiotics

**Antibiotics**

Pharmacodynamics vary considerably: bacterial eradication is
time-dependent for β-lactams (ie dependent on the time spent above *MIC*
), concentration-dependent for aminoglycosides (ie more killing at
higher peak concentrations) and total drug exposure-dependent for
vancomycin, fluoroquinolones (ie dependent on the *AUC* above *MIC* ).

# Anticholinergic toxicity

**Anticholinergic toxicity** (atropine toxicity) classically described:
red as a beet, hot as a stove, dry as a bone, mad as a hatter.

# Anticholinesterases

**Anticholinesterases** used to reverse neuromuscular blockade, diagnose
and treat myasthenia gravis. Disadvantages include cholinergic side
effects and the *ceiling effect*: effectiveness is limited by the amount
of ACh the patient can release from nerve terminals.

(see **organophosphate poisoning**).

# Antidepressants

TCA - anticholinergic, antihistamine, block uptake 1
(**catecholamines**), Class 1a **antiarrythmic** action, and blockade of
**GABA <sub>A</sub>** channels.

# Aortic stenosis

**Aortic stenosis** Hypertrophied left ventricle with very high
intra-ventricular pressures leads to critical **coronary** flow. The
non-compliant ventricle is more dependent on atrial contraction for
filling. A drop in blood pressure precipirates a *catastrophic downward
spiral* of decreasing cardiac output, decreasing coronary blood flow,
subendocardial ischaemia, impaired contractility, further decrease in
cardiac output.

# Apnoeic oxygenation

**Apnoeic oxygenation** (eg. during **brain stem death testing** ) does
not occur by diffusion. It occurs by mass transfer of oxygen. 100%
oxygen (in a pre-oxygenated patient) flows into the lungs down a
pressure gradient. The VCO<sub>2</sub> (eg. 200ml/min) is dissolved in
total body water, and equilibrates with alveolar gas. The PaCO2 rises by
approximately 0.5kPa/min. If FRC = 2000ml, then 10ml/min CO2 will be
added to FRC. PCO<sub>2</sub>/P<sub>B</sub> = 0.5/101.3. Multiply by
2000ml = 10ml.

Therefore roughly 250ml/min ( **VO<sub>2</sub>** ) is removed from the
alveoli by blood flow, and this is only replaced with around 10mls of
CO2 from metabolism. Gas from the higher airways flows into the alveoli
to replace the deficit.

# ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome)

Defined as:

The independent risk factors for ALI are old age, infection,
neurological disease, alcohol abuse and multiple transfusions.

3 overlapping phases: acute pulmonary oedema, hyaline organisation,
fibrosis.

# Area under curve (AUC)

**Area under curve (AUC)** of a graph shows x multiplied by y for a
given range. The area under a concentration-time curve can give you
cardiac output, clearance, and volume of distribution.

AUC = C\*T = M/V\*t = Mt/V

AUC/MASS = t/V

MASS/AUC = V/t = flow.

V<sub>D</sub> = Τ\*dose/AUC

(see pharmacokinetics)=

# Arterial line

**Arterial line** damping, resonance, flush solution must not contain
dextrose (causes artefactually high glucose measurements in sampled
blood, leading to potentially fatal doses of insulin).

# Artery of Adamkiewicz

A large dominant intercostal artery that contributes the major supply to
the anterior spinal artery. Important in AAA surgery - risk of ischaemia
to **spinal cord**.

# Autonomic nervous system

**Autonomic nervous system** controls automatic functions of the body.
**Parasympathetic** fibres arise from *cranio-sacral* neurones;
**sympathetic** fibres arise from *thorabo-lumbar* neurones.

# Autoregulation

**Autoregulation** of blood flow to an organ is accomplished in three
ways.

*Metabolic:* release of H+, K+, adenosine and CO2 causes vasodilation,
shear stress transduction by endothelium.

*Myogenic:* **Laplace** muscle stretch

*Neurogenic:* autonomic n.s., mainly sympathetic.

Cessation of cerebral electrical activity occurs at a CBF of about
15mls/100g/min.

Propofol improves autoregulation to brain; volatile agents impair it.

# Avogadro's constant

**Avogadro's constant** Number of molecules in a mole: 6.022 x
10<sup>23</sup>. (See **units** ).

# Awake fibreoptic intubation

**Awake fibreoptic intubation** requires anaesthesia of the airway by
nerve blocks or 'spray-as-you-go' topical anaesthesia.

Spray-as-you-go: Maximum safe dose of lignocaine is 9ml/kg by this
route: Woodall BJA 2005.

Lignocaine 10% topical spray delivers 10mg with each spray.

# Baroreceptors

**Baroreceptors** (see **Valsalva manoeuvre** ) Arterial baroreceptors
are phasic (as opposed to tonic) receptors so they respond profoundly to
*change* in pressure, and only weakly to *absolute* pressure. This means
that the strength of the pulsation is sensed more accurately than the
pressure, suggesting that evolution is more interested in cardiac output
than blood pressure. xxx

Afferent signals from aortic arch baroreceptors travel in the vagus, and
from carotid body baroreceptors in the glossopharangeal nerve. Signals
are integrated in the vasomotor centre in the medulla.

Nucleus tractus solitarius.

Unclamping tonic inhibition.

Cardiac output is regulated.

# Beck's triad

**Beck's triad** in cardiac tamponade:

Shock - hypotension

Muff - muffled heart sounds

JVD - jugular venous distension

# Beer-Lambert law

**Beer-Lambert law**

I<sub>t</sub> =I <sub>i</sub>.e<sup>-dcα</sup>

I<sub>t</sub> - transmitted intensity; I <sub>i</sub> - incident
intensity

d - distance(Beer's law) c - concentration (Lambert's law)

α - extinction coefficient (specific to each substance)

# Benzodiazepines

**Benzodiazepines** increase frequency of opening of **GABA <sub>A</sub>
receptors** .

<img src="images/image003.jpg" width="400" />

Flumazenil is a competitive antagonist with a short half-life.

# Bernoulli's principle

**Bernoulli's principle** is that the sum of:

\- Pressure potential energy (= P),

\- Kinetic energy (= ½ρv <sup>2</sup> ), and

\- Gravitational potential energy (= ρgh)

is constant for a given fluid.

P + ½ρv <sup>2\ +</sup> ρgh = k

This is important for two reasons. Firstly, it predicts that
fast-flowing fluids will exert less **pressure** on the walls of their
container. Hence the **Venturi effect** occurs. Secondly, the much
easier *modified Bernoulli equation* is used to predict trans-valve
pressures from measured velocity by Doppler echocardiography:

ΔP = 4v<sup>2</sup>

# Beta blockers

**Beta blockers**

β-blocker poisoning is treated with iv fluid, atropine, glucagon,
Ca<sup>++</sup> , vasopressors, high dose **insulin** and glucose
infusions, and **phosphodiesterase inhibitors** .

Xxx esmolol/labetolol like remi/propofol comparison???

# Bilateral hilar lymphadeopathy

TB, sarcoid, cancer, lymphoma. Cystic fibrosis, Churg-Strauss, HIV, EAA,
phenytoin, pneumoconiosis.

# Biliary excretion

High molecular weight compounds are secreted into bile by **active
transport** . Some drugs are excteted unchanged, while others are
solubilised by conjugation with glucoronide or suphate xxx. (See
**hepatic metabolism.** )

Enterohepatic circulation.

# Bioavailability. AUC

AUC<sub>oral</sub> / **AUC**<sub>iv</sub>

# Blood storage

**Blood storage** In the UK, donor blood is anticoagulated with either
CPD (citrate-phosphate-dextrose) or CPD-A (CPD + adenine).

After removal of plasma, blood is usually resuspended in SAG-M
(saline-adenine-glucose-mannitol).

# Blood substitutes

**Blood substitutes** have not yet made it to clinical practice. They
are of two types: perfluorocarbons (hydrocarbons with fluorine replacing
the hydrogens) and haemoglobin-based oxygen carriers. Both transport
oxygen, have short (12h) half-lives, and impair microvascular perfusion.

Perfluorocarbons are highly insoluble, so they are presented as a lipid
emulsion in egg phosphatide, just like propofol. Oxygen does not bind to
PFCs but they have an essentially unlimited capacity to dissolve gases,
so there is a linear relationship between oxygen content and PO2.

\[Milligan, L.J. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **4** ,
35-39(2004).\]

# Blood transfusion

**Blood transfusion** .

Risks: Massive transfusion (blood volume replaced in &lt;24h): ↓ Temp, ↓
pH, ↓ coagulation factors, ↓ Ca++, ↑K+.

In order of morbidity/mortality:

1. TRALI

2. Immediate haemolytic reactions: immune/non-immune - Intravascular
haemolysis: fever, urticaria, hypotension, DIC.

3. Delayed haemolytic reactions 7-21 days, extravascular haemolysis, ↓
Hb.

4. Fever reaction. Common but harmless.

5. Allergy. Urticaria, fever. Anaphylaxis rare.

6. Infection:

Bacterial

\- RCC (4°C) Gram -ve, eg. Yersinia enterocolitica; Pseudomonas

\- Plts (20°C) Gram +ve, eg. Staph. Epidermidis, Staph. Aureus,
Bacillus.

Viral

\- HBV

\- HCV: 1 in 32 million

\- HIV: 1 in 5 million

\- CMV

Prion

7. GvHD. Pre-leucodepletion. Mortality 90%.

8. Immunosuppression - used therapeutically to prevent transplant
rejection.

\[Maxwell, M.J. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **6** ,
225-229(2006).\]

# Blood volume

**Blood volume** estimated at:

Neonate: xxx

Child: 85mls/kg

Men: 75mls/kg xxx

Women: 65mls/kg

Elderly:

Severely obese: 45mls/kg

# Blood-brain barrier

**Blood-brain barrier** is constructed of tightly linked vascular
endothelial cells and prevents free diffusion between blood and brain
interstitium.

# BMI (body mass index)

**BMI (body mass index)** = weight(kg)/(height(m)) <sup>2</sup>

# Bohr equation

**Bohr equation**. (See **deadspace**.)

# Boyle's law

**Boyle's law** see **gas laws** . Constant T; P varies as 1/V.

# Brachial plexus

**Brachial plexus**

<img src="images/image005.jpg" width="400" />

All of the extensors in the arm are supplied by the posterior cord.

# Brain

**Brain** usually weighs around 1.5kg, receives a blood flow of about
50mls/100g of tissue, and has a oxygen consumption (
**CMRO<sub>2</sub>** ) of about 38 mls/kg (ie. 10x whole-body average
**oxygen consumption**), amounting to 1/5 of total VO<sub>2</sub> . (See
also **circle of Willis** and **venous drainage of brain** ).

# Brain death

**Brain death** (See **brain stem death testing** ). Humoral responses
following death:

Catecholamine storm leading to depletion of **catecholamines.**

Endocrine consequences of brain death:

↓ ACTH ↓ cortisol

↓ TSH ↓ thyroxine

?↑ insulin

↓ ADH - Diabetes insipidus.

Treatment:

DDAVP

Thyroxine

Methylprednisolone

?insulin

# Brain stem death testing

**Brain stem death testing** . Diagnosis of death requires *absent
cranial nerve activity* and *no **ventilatory response** to
hypercapnia.*

Prerequisites for testing (2008 Academy of Medical Royal Colleges
Guidelines):

1. Apnoeic coma

2. Irremediable structural brain injury

3. Absence of another cause of coma:

a. *Primary* hypothermia (T &lt; 34°C)

b. *Primary* metabolic/endocrine derangement:

Glucose &lt;3 or &gt;20 mmol/l

Na+ &lt;115 or &gt;160 mmol/l

Profound ↓ K+ / Mg+ / PO4-

c. MAP &lt; 60mmHg

d. PaO2 &lt; 10kPa; PaCO2 &gt;6; abnormal pH

e. Drug intoxication/neuromuscular blockade. Thiopentone &gt; 5mg/l

Midazolam &gt; 10μg/l

f. Neuromuscular disorders

g. Abnormal posturing (decerebrate/ decorticate).

Tests required of *cranial nerve activity* :

Test of **ventilatory response** to *hypercapnia* :

# Bronchial tree

**Bronchial tree** Contains 23 divisions, ie 2 <sup>23</sup> bronchi and
bronchioles, terminating in at least 10 <sup>8</sup> alveoli. Autonomic
innervations is from vagus and sympathetic fibres arising from T
<sub>1</sub> -T <sub>4</sub> .

# Bronchopleural fistula

**Bronchopleural fistula** is managed by :

1. Ventilator adjustments

\- ↓ RR, ↓ V <sub>T</sub> , ↓ PEEP, ↓ t <sub>insp</sub> .

2. Adequate **chest drain** placement

3. Weaning to spontaneous ventilation

4. Surgery +/- double lumen tube

\[Paramasivam, E. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **8** ,
204-209(2008).\]

# Buffers 1.5 pH points…

**Buffers 1.5 pH points…**

# Burns

**Burns**

Sux - high risk of hyperkalaemia 3 - 56 days after burns.

Parkland formula: 2-4mls/kg/%area full thickness burns. ½ over 8h; ½
over 16h.

Early enteral nutrition.

# C6 slice -

<img src="images/image023.jpg" width="400" />

# Calcium

**Calcium** 99% of Ca++ is found in bone as hydroxyapatite. Of
circulating Ca++, 50% is free, 45% is protein bound, and 5% bound to
anions (eg citrate, lactate). Normal range 2.2-2.6 mmol/l, correction
for albumin = 0.02\*(40-\[Alb\]).

Controlled by the level of

*<span class="underline">Parathyroid hormone</span>* see **nephron.**

*<span class="underline">Calcitonin</span>*

*<span class="underline">Acitvated vitamin D</span>* (1,25
dihydroxycholecalciferol)

# Capacitance (electrical)

**Capacitance (electrical)** = charge/voltage.

# Capacitance (haemodynamic)

**Capacitance (haemodynamic)** = Volume/ΔPressure

# Carbon monoxide poisoning

**Carbon monoxide poisoning** CO binds avidly to Hb (affinity 240x &gt;
O<sub>2</sub>) forming carboxyhaemoglobin COHb.

Brain injury occurs. 3% die, 33% have neurological symptoms at 1yr if
treated with 100% O2 (half that many if treated with hyperbaric O2).

Causes hypoxia (COHb, leftshift HC curve)

Lipid peroxidation (immune activation)

Inhibits cytochrome c (see **mitochondrial metabolism** )

t <sub>½</sub> of COHb is: 240 minutes breathing air, 40 minutes
breathing 100% O<sub>2</sub> , and 20 minutes on 100% O<sub>2</sub> at 3
atm.

# Carcinoid

**Carcinoid** Gut enterochromaffin xxx cell tumour secretes numerous
neurogenic amines, including serotonin. Symptoms only present following
hepatic metastasis because amines are metabolised otherwise. Flushing,
dizziness, nausea, hypotension, bronchoconstriction.

# Cardiac arrest

**Cardiac arrest** is caused by these reversible pathologies:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Hypoxia</td>
<td>Thrombosis</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Hypothermia</td>
<td>Tamponade</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Hypo/hyperkalaemia</td>
<td>Tension pneumothorax</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Hypovolaemia</td>
<td>Toxicity</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Cardiac cycle

**Cardiac cycle**

<img src="images/image007.jpg" width="400" />

NB this is wrong as LV pressure must be greater than aortic during
systole.

See **Left ventricular pressure-volume curves**

# Cardiac Index

CI = Cardiac output / body surface area. NR: 2.6-4.2 l/min

# Cardiac Output (Q)

**Cardiac Output (Q)**

Important physiological equations:

*<span class="underline">Q =venous return</span>* : the heart pumps
harder if more blood flows into it ( **Frank-Starling mechanism** ). In
health, what goes in must come out.

*<span class="underline">Q=SV\*HR</span>* : mathematically correct, but
physiologically misleading. Electrical pacing an animal heart yeilds
constant cardiac output between 50 and 200 bpm.

*<span class="underline">Q=ΔP/SVR</span>* : Ohm's law. Always true, but
remember that SVR is a composite measure of many different factors,
including arteriolar resistance, viscosity

# Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET)

**Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET)** is used to identify
high-risk patients undergoing surgery. Thresholds: VO<sub>2</sub> max
&lt;15 mlO2/kg/min or anaerobic threshold &lt;11 mlO<sub>2</sub> /kg/min
predict high risk. A metabolic equivalent (met) is a given patient's
metabolic rate at rest. It usually equates to 3.5 mlO2/kg/min. xxx ref

# Cardiovascular function

**Cardiovascular function** assessment. Angina is classified by the CCS
(Canadian Cardiovascular Society) functional classification; heart
failure by the NYHA (New York Heart Association) score:

\*metabolic equivalent. See **cardiopulmonary exercise test** .

# Cardiovascular risk

**Cardiovascular risk** Revised cardiac risk index (RCRI). More than 3
risk factors = 5% risk cardiac event (MI or arrest).

1. IHD (MI/angina/q-waves on ECG)

2. CCF (congestive cardiac failure)

3. CVD (cerbrovascular disease)

4. CRF (creatinine &gt; 177μmol/l)

5. DM (requiring insulin)

6. High-risk surgery (abdominal or thoracic)

\[ref lee\]

The ACC/AHA guidelines specify the following major risk factors, any of
which mandates treatment before elective surgery:

Significant arrhythmias:

\[Fleisher, L.A. et al. *J Am Coll Cardiol* **50** , e159-242(2007).\]

# Catecholamines

**Catecholamines** are synthesised in the adrenal medulla and in
neurones. They are taken up into nerve endings by uptake 1 (slow,
noradrenaline-selective, inhibited by cocaine) and into non-neuronal
cells by uptake 2 (rapid, adrenaline-selective) and metabolised by
catechol-o-methyl transferase (predominantly in nerve endings) and
monoamine oxidase (predominantly in liver) xxx to produce a wide range
of metabolites including vanillomandelic acid (VMA), which is excreted
in urine.

<img src="images/image009.jpg" width="400" />

Other vasoactive amines include histamine, bradykinin and **serotonin**
.

See **infusion rates**

# Caudal block

**Caudal block** Epidural block, risk of intravascular injection and
dural puncture (dura ends at S2 but lower in infants).

In infants, rule of quarters: use 1/8 to 1/4% Bupivacaine. 1/4ml/kg for
sacral block, 2/4ml/kg lumbar, 3/4ml/kg low-thoracic and 4/4 4/4ml/kg
high-thoracic.

\[Morton CEACCP 2004\]

# Central venous pressure waveform

x-descent: atrial relaxation and valve moving down with ventricular
systole

y-descent: ventricular relaxation xxx

# Cerebral blood flow (CBF)

**Cerebral blood flow (CBF)** (See also **autoregulation** . For effect
of drugs on CBF, see **CMRO<sub>2</sub>** .)

<img src="images/image011.jpg" width="400" />

# Cervical spine injury

**Cervical spine injury** Clearing the C-spine in an unconscious patient
is difficult. C-spine CT with 3D reconstruction is generally considered
adequate.

Problems:

A - Denervation hyperkalaemia following suxamethonium does not usually
onset until 48h after injury.

Resp - C3,4,5 innervate **diaphragm** . Accessory muscles innervated by
cervical and thoracic nerves. These may contribute 60% of tidal volume
in some patients.

CVS - neurogenic shock secondary to sympathetic denervation.

Other: ileus is common; DVT prophylaxis mandatory.

# Charles' law

**Charles' law** see **gas laws** . Constant V, P varies as T.

# Chest drain

**Chest drain** Usually in 4 <sup>th</sup> to 6 <sup>th</sup>
**intercostal space** , anterior to the mid-axillary line (or the
anterior border of latissimus dorsi), posterior to pectoralis major (the
safe triangle). Underwater seal must meet certain requirements:

\- volume of water in bottle must be more than ½ patient's maximum
inspired volume

\- volume of air in chest tube must also be more than ½ of patient's
maximum inspired volume

\- Bottle should be more than 80cm below chest (because inspiratory
pressures of -60cmH2O can be generated in some cases)

\- Tube should be less than 5cm below water level so that gas can bubble
out freely.

3-bottle suction system: TRAP - SEAL - SUCK.

<img src="images/image018.gif" width="178" height="134" />

In 1-bottle system, only the seal is used. Depth of the tube tip
determines pressure that must be overcome for drainage to occur. Should
be &lt; 5cmH <sub>2</sub> O.xxx

# Chi-squared test

**Chi-squared test** applies to a 2 x 2 table, eg.:

Examines whether there is an association between the row variable and
the column variable. It compares the *observed* data with the results
*expected if there were no association:*

(observed-expected) <sup>2</sup> /expected

This is done for each of the four squares in the table, and the results
are all added together:

Χ <sup>2</sup> = ∑ (O-E) <sup>2</sup> /E

The significance value is then read from a table of the Chi distribution
(higher Χ <sup>2</sup> = lower p-value). If there are less than 20
subjects then *Fisher's exact test* is used.

# Cholinesterase

**Cholinesterase** see **esterases.**

# Chronaxie

**Chronaxie** is the time required to depolarise a nerve at twice its
**rheobase** .

# Chronic Liver Disease

Nine signs: - leuconychia - clubbing - palmar erythema - Dupuytren's -
spider naevi - gynaecomastia - loss of body hair - caput medusae - small
testes

# Circle system

**Circle system** May be *semi-open* or *closed* . It is closed when
fresh gas flow rate (FGF) = uptake of gases by patient. In steady state,
this means FGF = VO<sub>2</sub> .

The standard arrangement of components is shown in the figure.
Re-breathing will not occur as long as there are two unidirectional
valves between the four components (A-B-C-F) and the patient.

<img src="images/image020.gif" width="184" height="68" />

Time constant for equilibration = Volume of circle/fresh gas flow.

# Clearance

**Clearance** is the volume of *plasma* cleared of a substance in a
given period of time.

By the definition of **concentration** , *for a given time period* :

Volume cleared = mass of drug removed / plasma concentration.

The name of the game is working out the mass of drug removed. For renal
clearance, this is the concentration in urine(U) x the volume of urine
produced (V).

Clearance = UV/P

For an infusion at steady state, mass of drug removed = mass of drug
infused so:

Clearance = mass infused/C <sub>P</sub> ss

For any drug,

Clearance = Dose/AUC = V <sub>D</sub> /τ = mass infused/C <sub>P</sub>
ss = UV/P

(See **pharmacokinetics** , **area under curve** ).

# Closing capacity

**Closing capacity** changes with age.

xxx

<img src="images/image014.gif" width="68" height="68" />
<img src="images/image016.gif" width="169" height="118" />

# CMRO<sub>2</sub> (Cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen)

**CMRO<sub>2</sub> (Cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen)** Normally
38ml/kg (ten times the whole-body VO2). In general, CMRO<sub>2</sub>
increases with NMDA-antagonists, and decreases with GABA-agonists.

\*Desflurane has no effect on CMRO<sub>2</sub> .

\*\*A bolus of alfentanil increases ICP.

\[Moss, E. *Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain
Medicine* **1** , 67(2001).\]

# Coagulation

**Coagulation** *in vivo* is a complex self-propagating interaction
between cells, clotting factors, endogenous anti-coagulants, platelets,
and fibrinolytic enzymes. It can be initiated by numerous factors
including exposure of tissue factor or collagen, and platelet
activation.

Clot formation has 5 steps:

\- *<span class="underline">Initiation</span>* (Tissue factor or
collagen. VIIa is critical, IX, and X produce small amounts of thrombin)

\- *<span class="underline">Amplification</span>* (thrombin activates
platelets and clotting factors, which in turn increase thrombin
production ( *positive feedback* ))

\- *<span class="underline">Propagation</span>* (thrombin burst)

\- *<span class="underline">Stabilisation</span>* (thrombin-activatable
fibrinolysis inhibitor)

\- *<span class="underline">Prevention</span>* of further coagulation
(activated protein C, antithrombin)

Xxx Fibrinolysis. PLASMIN

<img src="images/image022.gif" width="150" height="127" />

\[after intrinsic {collagen: X} and intrinsic {tissuefactor : VII, X}\]
Incorporate THROMBIN BURST

The final part of the coagulation cascade. Ca++ is important at every
stage.

Xxx add thrombin activation of platelets, endothelial cells. +ve
feedback.

WEPT

# Coagulopathy

**Coagulopathy** Acute coagulopathy encountered in anaesthesia is
usually caused by:

Transfusion coagulopathy

Fibrinolysis

DIC

Hypothermia

Acidosis

Hypocalcaemia

Drugs

Also consider:

Sepsis

Liver/renal failure

Bone marrow disease

Treatments include:

FFP

Platelets

Cryoprecipitate

Tranexamic acid - prevents plasmin activation

Recombinant Factor VIIa (NB Plts&gt;50; Fib &gt; 0.5; Ph&gt;7.2)

Desmopressin - increases Factor VIII concentration

Vitamin K - essential for activation of II, VII, IX, and X.

Ca++

Include TEG

Chronic coagulopathies include:

Haemophilia VII.VIII

Von Willebrand's disease

# Coanda effect

**Coanda effect** Fluid logic. Used in Penlon Nuffield xxx ventilators.
Can cause cardiac ischaemia.

# Coefficient of variation

**Coefficient of variation** is calculated as the **standard deviation**
divided by the **mean** . It is a dimensionless number, enabling
comparison of the variation in different data sets.

# Coma

**Coma** may be caused by:

Respiratory: hypoxia / hypercarbia

Cardiovascular: shock

Neurological: mass lesion / brainstem infarct / seizure

Glucose: high or low

Electrolytes: Sodium

GI: Fulminant hepatic failure

Renal: Uraemia

Drugs

Endocrine: Myxoedema

# Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS)

**Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS)**

\- *Type 1* (formerly known as reflex sympathetic dystrophy) pain not in
a nerve distribution.

\- *Type 2* (formerly known as causalgia) pain in a nerve distribution.

Pain - **neuropathic** features, constant

Vascular abnormalities - too much/too little blood

Sweating/Swelling - too much / too little sweating, oedema

Skin/soft tissue - atrophy, nail changes

# Compliance

**Compliance** Change in volume for a given change in pressure.

Static compliance

Dynamic compliance

# Concentration

**Concentration** is intuitive, but it is worth remembering that
**pharmacokinetics** , **clearance** and dye-dilution cardiac output are
easily understood from the following:

# Confidence interval (CI)

**Confidence interval (CI)** 95%CI = 1.96 x **SEM** . The average in a
study group is the *sample mean* , but of more interest is the true
*population mean* . There is a 95% chance that the true population mean
lies within the confidence interval.

# Connections

**Connections** Breathing system: 15 and 22mm. Scavenging 30mm.

# Conscious sedation

**Conscious sedation** is defined by the Academy of Medical Royal
Colleges as depression of the central nervous system such that treatment
may be carried out, but during which verbal contact with the patient is
maintained throughout. The patient remains conscious, retains protective
reflexes, and responds to verbal commands.

# Context-sensitive half life

**Context-sensitive half life** The time taken for the concentration to
fall by half *after the end of an infusion* .

# Contingency table xxx find better title!

**Contingency table xxx find better title!**

Reciever-operator characteristic (ROC) curves plot sensitivity against
1-specificity. The same curve is obtained if false positive rate is
plotted against true postive rate. Xxx

\[Lalkhen, A.G. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **8** ,
221-223(2008).\]

# Control of breathing

**Control of breathing** . xxx

Respiratory centre (DIVE)

Dorsal: inspiration

Ventral: expiration.

# Coronary

**Coronary** arteries perfuse from outside to inside of myocardium. Flow
only occurs in diastole. **Ohm's law** dictates that:

Coronary flow = Diastolic blood pressure - LVEDP/resistance

# Correlation coefficient

**Correlation coefficient** is between 1 and -1. A value of 0 indicates
no correlation, 1 means a perfect positive correlation, and -1 means a
perfect negative correlation.

# Coulomb

**Coulomb** (see **units** )

# Creatinine

It is concentrated 200x in urine.

# Critical temperature

**Critical temperature** is the temperature above which a gas cannot
become a liquid no matter how much pressure is applied.

# CSF (cerebrospinal fluid)

**CSF (cerebrospinal fluid)** is produced at about 0.4ml/min by choroid
plexus in lateral and third ventricles. K+/Na+ ATPase and carbonic
anhydrase are necessary for production.

\[Moss, E. *Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain
Medicine* **1** , 67(2001).\]

# Cyanide toxicity

**Cyanide toxicity** Dicobalt edetate.

# Cyclinders

**Cyclinders** are made of molybdenum steel and tested five-yearly with
pressurised water. The pressure achieved is engraved on the cylinder
head along with the tare weight (weight of empty cylinder), and chemical
symbols of the gases within.

# Cyclo-oxygenase enzymes

**Cyclo-oxygenase enzymes**

Membrane phospholipid

Pholpholipase A2

Arachidonic acid

COX1-constitutive COX2-inducible

Eicoxanoids Prostaglandins TXA <sub>2</sub>

# Cytochrome P <sub>450</sub> enzymes

**Cytochrome P <sub>450</sub> enzymes** . Large group of enzymes
involved in **hepatic metabolism** (Phase 1: oxidation, hydroxylation)
of many drugs (warfarin, **benzodiazepines** , xxx). Volatile agents are
metabolised by the subtype 2e1.

INHIBITORS

Omeprazole

D

E

V

I

C

E

S

INDUCERS

Phenytoin

Carbamazepine

Barbiturates

Rifampicin

Alcohol (acute)

Sulph

# Dantrolene

**Dantrolene** prevents Ca++ release from sarcoplasmic reticulum in
striated muscle. It is given in a dose of 1-2mg/kg to treat **malignant
hyperpyrexia.**

# Data

**Data** Classified for statistical analysis:

Nominal - just names.

Ordinal - names with intrinsic order

Interval - ordered with regular intervals between xxx

Continuous -

Rational -

See **normal distribution.**

# Day case surgery

**Day case surgery** AAGBI (2005) guidelines. Requirements:

Social:

1. Responsible companion for 24h post-op.

2. Telephone

3. Home facilities

Medical

1. Fit or well-controlled chronic disease.

Pre-assesment essential, decision for day case based on clinical
assessment, not arbitrary thresholds such as age or **ASA grade** .

# Deadspace

That part of the inspired gas that does not take part in gas exchange.

Fowler's method

See **Nitrogen washout.**

# Deafferentation pain

**Deafferentation pain** is caused by interruption of the spinothalamic
tract (see **spinal cord** ) at any level. It is commonest with spinal
cord injury or MS. It is associated with sensory deficit.

# Decontamination

**Decontamination** Items must be cleaned first.

*<span class="underline">Low-level decontamination</span>* : bleach/70%
alcohol and chlorhexidine. (kills most bacteria, some fungi, some
viruses)

*<span class="underline">High-level disinfection</span>* : aldehydes,
chlorine dioxide. Kills almost everything, not spores.

*<span class="underline">Sterilisation</span>* : autoclaving/ gamma
irradiation. Kills everything. Does not destroy prions.

# Dermatomes

**Dermatomes**

# Diaphragm

**Diaphragm** is a muscular and tendinous dome that separates the thorax
and abdomen.

<img src="images/image026.gif" width="189" height="143" />

# Diathermy

**Diathermy** uses high frequencies to decrease the risk of VF. Heat
generated α power (from 50-400W)

Cutting: sine wave 0.5MHz

Coag: damped sine wave 1.0-1.5Mhz - dessication

# Diffusing capacity

**Diffusing capacity** commonly measured across the lung for carbon
monoxide (D <sub>L</sub> CO). Has two components: diffusion across the
membrane (DM) and binding to haemoglobin (θV <sub>C</sub> ; reaction
rate= θ; capillary blood volume = V <sub>C</sub> )(diffusion in plasma
is negligible). DLCO is a like a conductance, so the reciprocal of it is
a resistance. Resistances in series are summative, so:

1/D <sub>L</sub> CO = 1/D <sub>M</sub> + 1/θV <sub>C</sub>

θ varies with F <sub>I</sub> O<sub>2</sub> . Therefore, to calculate D
<sub>M</sub> , take two DL <sub>C</sub> O measurements are different F
<sub>I</sub> O<sub>2</sub> , plot 1/θ against D <sub>L</sub> CO, and
extrapolate to where 1/θ = 0. (ie θ = ∞ ). Thus 1/θV <sub>C</sub> = 0,
so D <sub>L</sub> CO = DM. \[check !‼\]

(Roughton & Forster 1957)

# Diffusion

**Diffusion** For any freely moving substance, Fick's law applies

*Net rate of transfer = -A\*D\*dc/dx*

A = area of plane

D = diffusion coefficient

dC/dx = concentration gradient - the change in concentration (ΔC: C1-C2)
over a given distance (Δx).

Across a lipid membrane, this becomes:

*Net rate of transfer = β\*A\*D\*dC/dx*

β = oil:gas partition coefficient

Diffusion coefficient is calculated by the Stokes-Einstein equation:

D = bT/6\*π\*viscosity\*molecular radius

T=temp

b= Boltzmann's constant: the **gas constant** divided by **Avogadro's
constant.**

The examiners will be expecting molecular weight to appear in there
somewhere. Molecular weight is approximately proportional to r
<sup>3</sup> for large molecules, and for molecules less than 300Da, MW
is proportional to r <sup>2</sup> , so diffusion is proportional to
1/√MW ( **Graham's law** ).

# Disinfection

**Disinfection** see **decontamination.**

# Diuretics

**Diuretics** . See **nephron** .

# Doppler

**Doppler** shift is measured by the equation

F <sub>d</sub> = (2F <sub>o</sub> /c)VcosΘ

F <sub>d</sub> - frequency shift

F <sub>o</sub> - transmitted frequency

C - velocity of sound in blood

V - velocity of flow

Θ - angle of US beam to flow

BART convention: blue away, red towards.

# Down's Syndrome

**Down's Syndrome** 1 in 700 live births. Trisomy 21 in 95% of cases, or
chromosomal translocation or mosaicism. On examination: low-set ears,
slanting eyes, epicanthic folds, single transverse palmar crease.
Anaesthetic problems:

*Airway:* Atlanto-axial subluxation in 10-20%.

Macroglossia, micrognathia, and short neck predict a nightmare airway,
but in practice failure to intubate is rare.

Tracheal stenosis in 5%. Post-operative airway problems in almost 40% in
one study. Check for a leak before extubating.

*Resp:* OSAHS in up to 75% of patients.

Chronic LRTI is common.

*Cardiac:* Congenital heart disease - particularly **ASD** , **VSD**
(with Eisenmenger's Syndrome), **Tetralogy of Fallot** . All should have
an echo.

*Neuro:* Cognitive impairment. Agitation post-op. Myopia and hearing
impairment common.

Hypotonia

*GI:* **GORD** is common.

\[Allt, J.E. et al. *BJA CEPD Reviews* **3** , 83-86(2003).\]

# Drug interactions

**Drug interactions** (See also **renal excretion, hepatic metabolism**
).

Pharmaceutical

Pharmacokinetic: a,d,m,e

Pharamacodynamic

Synergy (see **isobologram** ).

# Drug targets

**Drug targets**

# Dystrophia myotonica

**Dystrophia myotonica** See **myotonic dystrophy** .

# e

The base of the natural logarithm, 2.718.

# ED <sub>50</sub>

**ED <sub>50</sub>** (effective dose 50%) is the minimum dose to have a
given effect in 50% of the *population* .

# Electricity

**Electricity** may cause five problems:

Macroshock

**Microshock**

Failure

**Interference**

# Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)

**Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)** A safe and effective treatment for
refractory depression, mania, and schizoaffective disorder. After around
5s, a 30s seizure usually occurs.

Excessive vagal activity causes bradycardia/asystole immediately
following the shock. Then catecholamine release causes ↑MAP and ↑HR by
25%. Death rate (usually from MI/arrhythmia) around 1 in 100,000.

Cite Smetana Tess Current Concepts NEJM 2009-04-01

# Electroencephalogram (EEG)

**Electroencephalogram (EEG)** . Composite recording of surface
electrical activity from brain. Waveforms divided into four frequency
ranges labelled with Greek letters, but not in alphabetical order. δ
0-4Hz, θ 4-8Hz, α 8-12Hz, β &gt;12Hz. In general, frequency slows with
anaesthesia. Deep anaesthesia causes a burst-suppression pattern, in
which high-amplitude bursts occur separated by longer low-amplitude
'suppressions'.

# Electrolyte disturbances

**Electrolyte disturbances**

*Hyperkalaemia.* ECG changes (poorly correlated with \[K <sup>+</sup>
\]): First peaked T waves, then slowing conduction, broad QRS, long PR,
RBBB/LBBB, loss of p-waves. Ultimately sine wave

*Hypokalaemia* . ECG changes (poorly correlated with \[K <sup>+</sup>
\]): ST depression, small T-waves, large U-waves

*Hypercalcaemia.* Bones, stones, abdominal groans and psychic moans. ECG
changes: Long P-R interval, heart block. Flattened or inverted T-waves.

*Hypocalcaemia.* Carpopedal spasm, parasthesiae in extremities, positive
Chvostek's sign (tapping over **facial nerve** causes twitching of
facial muscles) and Trousseau's sign (inflating cuff round arm causes
spasm of arm muscles).

ECG changes xxx

*Hypophosphataemia* xxx

*Hypermagnesaemia xxx*

*Hyponatraemia.* Confusion, seizures, coma. Commonest cause is
bendrofluazide. Also SIADH, polydipsia. Correct Na+ slowly, particularly
if hyponatraemia is chronic. 2mmol/l per hour in first 6h, max
10-12mmol/l per day.

# Electron transport chain

**Electron transport chain** see **mitochondrial metabolism.**

# Electroneutrality

**Electroneutrality** . Rule of chemistry: any macroscopic region of a
solution must have the same number of positive and negative charges.

# Enterohepatic circulation

**Enterohepatic circulation** Reabsorption from small intestine of
substances excreted in bile (eg. Bile salts, oral contraceptive).
Sometimes requires functioning gut flora. Hence antibiotics decrease
efficacy of oral contraceptives by killing flora, and decreasing
reabsorption from gut.

# Eponymous effects

**Eponymous effects**

Haldane

Bohr

Seebeck

Poynting

# Erythrocyte

**Erythrocyte** diameter 6-8 μm.

# Ester

**Ester** a type of chemical bond formed between an alcohol and a
carboxylic acid. R-O-CO-R'.

# Esterases

**Esterases** Three types are important:

1. Acetylcholinesterase - hydrolyses ACh in nerve endings

2. Plasma cholinesterase is also call pseudocholinesterase or
butyrylcholinesterase. It circulates in plasma, and hydrolyses
**suxamethonium** and mivacurium.

3. Non-specific plasma esterases. Hydrolyse esmolol, remifentanil.

# Ether

**Ether** is shorthand for ethyl ether (CH3-CH2-O-CH2-CH3) but more
specifically refers to the C-O-C bond. (See **inhalational agents** )

# Exsanguination

**Exsanguination** Never turn your back on the four horsemen of occult
exsanguination:

Retroperitoneal space

Peritoneum

Thoracic cavity

Thigh compartments

# Fade

**Fade** decrease in amplitude of muscle twitches on train-of-four (TOF)
or double-burst stimulation (DBS) testing that occurs with partial
non-depolarising neuromuscular blockade, or phase II block with a
**depolarising muscle relaxant** .

Normally, 50 fewer ACh vesicles are released with each depolarisation
(at 2Hz), but because 5x more ACh is released than is needed for
contraction, fade isn't seen unless there is substantial receptor
occupancy (see **Michaelis-Menten** ):

1 twitch &gt; 95% receptor occupancy

2 twitches &gt; 90%

3 twitches &gt; 80%

4 twitches &lt;70%

# Fallot's tetralogy

**Fallot's tetralogy** See **tetralogy of Fallot.**

# Fick principle

**Fick principle**

Mass of substance removed = flow of blood to organ x arterio-venous
concentration difference

# Fick's law of diffusion

**Fick's law of diffusion** See **diffusion** .

# Filling ratio

**Filling ratio** weight of fluid in cylinder/weight of water in full
cylinder. N2O filling ratio: 0.75 in UK; 0.67 in hot countries

# Filters

**Filters** Four important principles are used by anaesthetic *dry gas*
filters to remove particles (S-I-D-E):

1. *<span class="underline">S</span> ieve* effect - pores prevent
passage of particles bigger than the maximum pore diameter. However, dry
gas filters rely on the other three mechanisms and have a wide range of
pore sizes in the mesh.

2. *<span class="underline">I</span> nertial collection* - channels
through filter are convoluted, and particles are heavier than gas so
they accumulate on corners in the channels.

3. *<span class="underline">D</span> iffusional impaction* - small
(&lt;0.5μm) particles are caught on the sides of pores as they bounce
around due to Brownian motion.

4. *<span class="underline">E</span> lectrostatic* - charge differences
between particles and filter membranes cause attraction.

Hygroscopic (absorbs water from atmosphere) element is added to provide
heat and moisture exchange (see **Humidification** ).

Breathing system filters are of two types:

1. Hydrophobic: pleated hydrophobic fibres prevent water from carrying
particles through filter. Very small pores.

2. Electrostatic: extra charge is applied to fibres to enhance
electrostatic effect. Large pores.

NB pore size list

Breathing system filters should filter out particles &gt;2 μm diameter

\[xxx cite DHT Scott et al…\]

# Fire

**Fire**

Electrical equipment is classified according to protections that are in
place to prevent shock

Class 1: equipment casing earthed

Class 2: double insulation

Class 3: isolated + low voltage

Isolated circuits are either battery-powered or isolated from the mains
supply by a transformer.

# Flow

**Flow** (Q) (see **flowmeters** ).

Laminar \[Hagen-P…\] Q= πΔP\*r <sup>4</sup> /8\*viscosity\*length

Reynold's number (&gt;2000 higher probability of turbulence)
Re=DVD/viscosity (imagine a DVD dropped on a pile of jam).

Turbulent Q varies as √ΔP\*r <sup>2</sup> /ρ\*l

The important factors to take from this are:

1. Flow is highly dependent on radius

2. A less DENSE fluid, eg Helium, is less likely to have turbulence, and
flows faster when flow is turbulent.

# Flow-volume loops. \[picture eg Davidsons\]

**Flow-volume loops. \[picture eg Davidsons\]**

# Flowmeters

**Flowmeters** (How is flow measured? Answer 1. Flowmeters; 2.
Physiological methods - see cardiac output)

\- **Constant orifice, variable pressure** eg.

o Pneumotachograph: A device for measuring flow. Measures the difference
in pressure across a fixed orifice. Radius and length are known,
viscosity is assumed, so flow can be calculated by **Hagen-Poisei** …
(see Flow).

o Simple pressure gauge downstream from a known pressure and known
resistance (eg outlet from gas cylinder).

\- **Variable orifice, constant pressure** eg.:

o **Rotameter** : the tube is tapered so that the orifice is larger the
higher the bobbin moves. The pressure behind the bobbin supports its
weight; when flow is increased, the pressure behind the bobbin
increases, so the bobbin accelerates upwards until the orifice size is
large enough that the pressure behind the bobbin is only sufficient to
support the bobbin's weight.

o Wright Peak flow meter

# Fluids

**Fluids**

Hartmann's pH = 6.5

0.9% Saline pH = 5

Dextrose 5% pH = 4

<img src="images/image030.gif" width="194" height="140" />

# Fontan circulation

**Fontan circulation**

# Fractional sodium excretion (FENa). (

**Fractional sodium excretion (FENa). (** See **renal failure - acute.**
) The percentage of the sodium in the glomerular filtrate that is
excreted. Since 100% (near enough) of filtered creatinine is excreted,
FENa is calculated by 'scaling up' the urine:plasma sodium ratio by
multiplying it by the inverse of the urine:plasma creatinine ratio.

Normal PCr = 60μmol/l; normal UCr = 10mmol/l.

FENa &lt; 1% in pre-renal failure as normal compensation ( **RAAS** )
reclaims sodium from filtrate.

FENa &gt; 2% in acute tubular necrosis.

# g

Acceleration due to gravity 9.8 m/s <sup>2</sup>

# GABA <sub>A</sub> receptors

**GABA <sub>A</sub> receptors** . Inhibitory ligand-gated ion channel.
Site of action of most anaesthetic agents.

2α 2β 1γ subunits. Many different subtypes of each subunit (eg. α1 are
sedative, α2 anxiolytic, and α3 myorelaxant).

Benzodiazepines bind to α subunits and increase frequency of channel
opening. Barbiturates bind to β subunits and increase duration of
opening.

# Gas constant

**Gas constant** R = 8.314 J/K/mol.

# Gas detection. (

**Gas detection. (** See **blood gas detection** ) Essential **minimal
monitoring** : CO2, O2 (with alarm), volatile.

\[Langton, J.A. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **9** ,
19-23(2009).\]

# Gas Laws

**Gas Laws** Regarding a fixed mass of gas:

Boyle's Law: for constant temperature P varies as 1/V

Charles' Law: for constant pressure, V varies as T

Third gas Law: for constant volume, P varies as T

If you remember what is constant, the rest is intuitive. Boyle:
temperature; Charles (the balloonist): pressure.

# Gases

**Gases** obey the universal **gas law** PV=nRT. A mole of any gas
occupies 22.4l at SPD.

# Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium

**Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium** Holds for any pair of univalent anion and
cation at equilibrium across a membrane.

Eg: For K <sup>+</sup> and Cl <sup>-</sup> :

\[K\] <sub>A</sub> \[Cl\] <sub>A</sub> = \[K\] <sub>B</sub> \[Cl\]
<sub>B</sub>

# Global hypotonia

**Global hypotonia** is caused by a very limited number of conditions,
only a few of which may present acutely (Check and expand):

# Glottis

**Glottis** is the hole in between the vocal chords.

# Graham's Law

Rate of diffusion of a gas is inversely proportional to its density.

For a gas, diffusion rate α 1/√MW. See **diffusion** .

# Gram positive/negative organisms

**Gram positive/negative organisms** See *Bacteria **.***

# Guillain-Barré syndrome

causes ascending weakness and sensory impairment and acute autonomic
neuropathy with labile BP, arrhythmias and urinary retention. It follows
a precipitant such as viral illness, campylobacter *jejunii* infection
or vaccination. Anti-neuronal antibodies are present; lymphocytic
infiltration of nerves causes demyelination. **CSF** protein is raised.

In addition to supportive management, immunoglobulin therapy or
plasmapheresis are effective. In a self-ventilating patient, as with all
neuromuscular disorders, the key measurement of respiratory muscle
weakness is *vital capacity* (see **Pulmonary function tests** ).

# Haemofiltration

**Haemofiltration**

Exchange: 25mls/kg/hr

Too much causes hypophosphataemia

# Haemoglobin (Hb)

**Haemoglobin (Hb)** (MW 64558Da) has four **haem** molecules, each of
which binds one molecule of oxygen.

Adult Hb (HbA) has 2α and 2β subunits;

foetal Hb (HbF) has 2α and 2γ;

Variant adult Hb (HbA <sub>2</sub> ) has 2α and 2δ.

When O2 binds to a subunit, Hb changes from the T ('tight') to the R
('relaxed') conformation, which increases O2 affinity ( *cooperative
binding* ), causing the characteristic shape of the **oxyhaemoglobin
dissociation curve** .

Functions: O2 transport, CO2 transport ( **Haldane effect** ),
buffering, and O2 demand-delivery coupling through release of NO in
hypoxic conditions.

\[picture of HB -ribbon diagram if possible\]

Hypophosphataemia (?? ↓ DPG) shifts to left.

(see **methaemoglobinaemia** and **carbon monoxide poisoning** and
**sickle cell anaemia** )

# Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium

**Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium** is a get-out-of-jail-free card for any
question about a recessive disorder. Population frequency of dominant
allele = p; frequency of recessive allele = q. **Probability** of each
genotype is in brackets:

Therefore, for any population:

p <sup>2</sup> + 2pq + q <sup>2</sup> = 1

# Hartmann's Solution

**Hartmann's Solution** contains:

Na 131 K 5 Ca 2

Cl 111 Lactate 29mmol/l

# HCVR -

**HCVR -** hypercapnic ventilatory response. See **Ventilatory
responses.**

# Heart failure

**Heart failure**

Life is prolonged by β-blockers, ACE-inhibitors and spironolactone.

Acute decompensation is managed by:

Correction of hypoxia - CPAP, IPPV

Optimising preload - diuretics, nitrates

Maintaining cardiac output (CI&gt;2) - inotropes, resynchronisation or
revascularisation

\[Valchanov, K. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **8** ,
167-171(2008).\]

# Henderson equation

**Henderson equation** \[H <sup>+</sup> \] = 180 x P <sub>a</sub>
CO<sub>2</sub> /\[HCO <sub>3</sub> <sup>-</sup> \]

(\[H <sup>+</sup> \] in nmol/l; P <sub>a</sub> CO<sub>2</sub> in kPa;
\[HCO <sub>3</sub> <sup>-</sup> \] in mmol/l).

# Henderson-Hasselbalch equation

**Henderson-Hasselbalch equation** In general:

pH = pK - log <sub>10</sub> \[HCO <sub>3</sub> <sup>-</sup>
\]/\[CO<sub>2</sub> \]

Specifically for the bicarbonate buffer system:

pH = 6.1 - log <sub>10</sub> \[HCO <sub>3</sub> <sup>-</sup>
\]/(solubility constant x P <sub>a</sub> CO<sub>2</sub> )

*NB - the Henderson equation is algebraically identical. You choose!*

# Henry's law

**Henry's law** is that the solubility of a gas in a liquid varies
directly with partial pressure of the gas.

<sub>SOLUBILITY\ α\ PARTIAL\ PRESSURE</sub>

This gives rise to two solubility coefficients:

Otswold

Bunsen

# Heparin

**Heparin** enhances antithrombin III-mediated inhibition of factors
IIa, IXa, Xa, XIa, and XIIa. Low-molecular weight heparin primarily
inhibits Xa.

It is an acid drug, and is reversed by protamine, which binds heparin in
plasma. It is found in human plasma.

(See **coagulation** ).

# Heparin-induced thrombocytopaenia

**Heparin-induced thrombocytopaenia** . Hypercoagulable state occurs
paradoxically in association with throbocytopaenia 4-14 days after
starting heparin. Caused by antibodies to a complex of heparin and
platelet factor 4 (PF4). This complex is both immunogenic and
stimulatory to platelets (acting via cell-surface receptor FcγIIa).

# Hepatic acinus

**Hepatic acinus** (see **Liver** )

# Hepatic metabolism

**Hepatic metabolism** (See **biliary excretion** )

Phase 1: oxidation, hydroxylation, hydrolysis, reduction

Phase 2: conjugation (glucoronidation, sulphation) to enhance water
solubility.

# Hepatitis B

**Hepatitis B** . DNA virus, relatively easily transmitted through
blood, bodily secretions, sex. Endemic in China (10% carrier rate);
affects 300million people worldwide. Causes acute hepatitis (acute liver
failure in 1%) followed by:

\- Recovery: 90%

\- Chronic infection: 10%

o 20% develop cirrhosis within 20yrs

o Hepatocellular carcinoma

Prognosis is much worse for neonates infected by vertical transmission.
Acute treatment with immunisation and hyperimmune serum globulin, and
chronic treatment with pegylated interferon, lamivudine, and other
antivirals may substantially improve outcome.

# Hepatitis C

**Hepatitis C** RNA virus, transmitted primarily by blood contact.
Unlike hepatitis B it is not sexually transmitted, and usually does not
cause acute symptoms.

\- Chronic infection: 80%

o Cirrhosis within 20yrs in 20%.

▪ Hepatocellular carcinoma in 1 in 20 patients with cirrhosis.

Infection may be eradicated by pegylated interferon and ribavirin.

# Hippuric acid

**Hippuric acid** is a metabolite of toluene, and causes a metabolic
acidosis in glue sniffers. It is freely filtered and efficiently
secreted by the kidney, so that all of the hippuric acid that enters the
kidney in the blood, leaves it in the urine. Therefore hippuric acid
clearance = renal plasma flow. (Multiply by 1/(1-haematocrit) to get
renal blood flow.) Because hippurate ions are so rapidly cleared from
plasma, the **anion gap** is normal, even though the acidosis is caused
by an exogenous weak acid.

# Homeostatic hierarchy

**Homeostatic hierarchy** Physiological responses often have to
prioritise. Evidence from pyloric stenosis:
Volume&gt;potassium&gt;alkalaemia.

Volume&gt;osmolality.

# HPV

**HPV** See **Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction.**

# Huffner's constant

**Huffner's constant** the volume of oxygen gas that binds to a gram of
haemoglobin. Varies from 1.32 to 1.39 depending on the state/structure
of Hb

# Humidification

**Humidification** of inspired gases.

Direct injection of water/saline - risk of flooding airway

HME - **hygroscopic** element with low resistance and minimal deadspace.
Often combined with a **filter** .

Cold water bath - bubble gas through water. Inefficient.

Heated water bath- very efficient. Risk of flooding airway or tubing.

Nebulisers

# Humidity

**Humidity** absolute: mass of water in given volume of air; relative:
percentage of the maximum possible humidity at a given temperature (the
maximum is determined by *saturation vapour pressure* ).

# HVR -

**HVR -** hypoxic ventilatory response. See **Ventilatory responses.**

# Hygrometers

**Hygrometers**

\- Hair hygrometer: hair increases in length at higher humidity.

\- Regnault's hygrometer: silver vessel filled with ether, air bubbled
through it until it cools down so much that water vapour condenses on
the tube (dew point). Humidity read from tables (see SVP).

\- Wet and dry bulb hygrometer. Two thermometers, one has moist wick
around the bulb. Wet bulb is colder because of water evaporation; rate
of evaporation is determined by humidity. Humidity read from tables.

\- Electrical transducers - utilise compound whose resistance changes
with humidity, eg. Lithium chloride. LiCl.

# Hyperbaric oxygen

**Hyperbaric oxygen** is used to treat:

Decompression sickness (The Bends)

CO poisoning (COHb&gt;40%, pregnant)

Anaemic hypoxia without transfusion

# Hypersensitivity

**Hypersensitivity**

Type 1 Immediate (Anaphylaxis, Asthma)

Type 2 Cell-bound antigen (autoimmune disorders)

Type 3 Ab-Ag complex SLE, vasculitides

Type 4 Delayed (TB, RA, GVHD)

# Hypertension

**Hypertension** should be treated elective surgery if it is greater
than 180/110 or if there is end-organ damage (LVH, renal failure,
retinopathy).

Grade 1: SBP &gt; 140 or DBP &gt; 90

Grade 2: SBP &gt; 160 or DBP &gt; 100

Grade 3: SBP &gt; 180 or DBP &gt; 110.

Hypertension associated with acute organ famage (AKI, pulmonary oedema,
aortic dissection, ACS) should be treated with intravenous therapy. In
acute stroke, BP should be controlled (15% reduction per 24h) if:

&gt;220/120

&gt;185/110 if thrombolysis indicated (NB Plts&lt;100)

&gt;180/105 after thrombolysis

See also **intraoperative hypertension** .

\[European Society of Hypertension guidelines (2007)\]

# Hypo/hyperkalaemia/calcaemia/natraemia

**Hypo/hyperkalaemia/calcaemia/natraemia** . See **electrolyte
disturbances** .

Hypokalaemia and acidosis An unusual combination caused by gut or
kidney: Dialysis Acetazolamide Renal tubular acidosis Enteric losses
(diarrhoea, VIPoma)

# Hypokalaemia and Acidosis

Diuretics
Acetazolamide
Renal tubular acidosis type 1
Enteral losses

# Hypotension

**Hypotension** (see **shock** ).

# Hypotensive anaesthesia

**Hypotensive anaesthesia** is not used to make the difficult easy, but
rather to make the impossible possible. Risk of damage to brain, spinal
cord, heart, kidneys.

Mainstream techniques:

\- Anaesthetic agents:

\- Β-blockers (eg. Esmolol, labetalol)

\- Nitrates (eg. GTN, nitroprusside)

\- Regional anaesthesia

Crazy techniques:

\- Hydralazine (central action, also α-blockade)

\- Trimetaphan (nicotinic ganglion blocker)

\- Phentolamine (α-blocker)

# Hypothermia

**Hypothermia** (Intraoperative, see **thermoregulation** ).

Below 34 °C: ECG changes. Prolonged PR, QRS, QT. Bradycardia. J wave
height is inversely proportional to temperature.

Adrenergic vasopressors are not effective in hypothermia.

Triad of hypothermia, acidosis and coagulopathy in response to trauma.

# Hypoxia

**Hypoxia** In the broadest sense, failure to perform aerobic
metabolism. Causes are traditionally divided into:

\[graph of O2 cascade\]

Hypoxaemia can only occur if blood somehow gets past the lungs without
taking on oxygen.

Hypobaric hypoxia or breathing hypoxic gas

Hypoventilation - see **alveolar gas equation**

Venous admixture -

**Shunt**

Carriage - anaemia/ MetHb/ COHb.

Cytotoxic hypoxia -oxygen delivery is normal to cells but mitochondrial
metabolism fails to utilise oxygen.

# Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction

**Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction** See **HPV.**

# Hysteresis

**Hysteresis** from the Latin for 'comes after'; feature of measurement
and respiratory compliance curves.

# Ideal body weight

**Ideal body weight** is a concept invented by actuaries selling life
insurance, and corresponds to the weight associated with the lowest
mortality for a given height.

Many alternative formulae exist.

\[Adams, J.P. et al. *Br. J. Anaesth.* **85** , 91-108(2000).\]

# Immune cells

**Immune cells** .

*Monocytes*

*Granulocytes* :

Eosinophils

Basophils

Neutrophils

*Lymphocytes* :

CD4+ve

CD8+ve

# Immunosuppression

Azathioprine: metabolised to 6-mercaptopurine by liver, inhibits purine
metabolism (azathioPURine), so prevents clonal expansion of T- and B-
cells. (See **nucleic acids** )

Mycophenolate mofetil: an alternative to azathioprine.

Cyclosporin: xxx calcineurin inhibitor? highly nephrotoxic, very
variable oral absorption. Therefore give it *iv* around surgery; check
blood levels. Numerous drug interactions.

Tacrolimus: an alternative to cyclosporin. xxx calcineurin inhibitor?

Prednisolone: steroid side-effects. Increase dose around surgery.

# Impedence =

**Impedence =** resistance + reactance.

Reactance α 1/frequency.

# Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator nomenclature

**Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator nomenclature**

Shock-tachy-sense-brady.

# Infusion rates

Dose in ug/min is 3/4 of dose in mls/hr of 8mg%

# Inhalational anaesthetic agents

**Inhalational anaesthetic agents** are more potent if they have a
larger oil:gas solubility coefficient (the **Meyer-Overton observation**
) and have faster **uptake** and offset times if they are insoluble in
blood.

All are **ethers** , apart from halothane which is a *<span
class="underline">halo</span>*genated e*<span
class="underline">thane</span>*.

Desflurane, enflurane and to a lesser extent isoflurane produce carbon
monoxide in reaction with dry soda lime.

# Inotropes

**Inotropes**

Catecholamines (endogenous/synthetic)

Phosphodiesterase inhibitors

Digoxin

Levosimendan

Thyroxine

Ca++

High dose insulin (in poisoning Ca++ blockers, Beta blockers)

# Insulin

**Insulin** is a peptide hormone secreted in a cyclical manner by
pancreatic islet β cells. It is cleaved from a larger protein, yielding
C-peptide.

# Intercostal space

**Intercostal space** Nerves run deep to the internal intercostal
muscles and superficial to the innermost intercostals muscles.

Label Anterior primary ramus, paravertebral space, subcostal groove.

<img src="images/image034.gif" width="65" height="64" />
<img src="images/image036.gif" width="65" height="64" />

<img src="images/image038.gif" width="68" height="68" />
<img src="images/image040.gif" width="184" height="156" />

# Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP)

**Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP)** .

Counterpulsation in diastole increases coronary blood flow. Deflation at
onset of systole decreases afterload, improving cardiac output, which in
turn decreases preload.

Effects: ↓ SBP, ↑DBP.

Indications: myocardial ischaemia, cardiogenic shock.

Contra-indicated in **aortic regurgitation**, dissection and end-stage
disease.

\- Haemolysis decreases Hb by 5%.

\- Thrombosis is a big risk

\- Occlusion of renal arteries may occur

\[Krishna, M. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **9** ,
24-28(2009).\]

# Intra-operative bradycardia

**Intra-operative bradycardia**

# Intra-operative hypertension

**Intra-operative hypertension**

# Intra-operative hypotension (

**Intra-operative hypotension (** see **shock** ).

# Intra-operative hypoxia

**Intra-operative hypoxia** causes include:

A - blocked/kinked/disconnected

Resp - RMB intubation, hypoventilation, aspiration.

CVS - shunt

# Inulin

**Inulin** is freely filtered, and neither secreted, metabolised, nor
reabsorbed by the kidney. Therefore, inulin clearance = GFR. (See
**hippuric acid** )

# Isomers

**Isomers** have the same chemical constituents, but a different
structure.

Structural isomers: different bond structure (see **tautomerism** )

Stereoisomers: same bond structure, different 3-d structure.

\- Geometric isomers - free rotation is restricted by C=C or ring
structure, giving *cis/trans* forms.

\- Optical isomers (Enantiomers) - mirror images around a chiral centre.
Designated *laevo/ dextro* according to the direction of rotation of
polarised light, or more recently R (rectus) or S (sinister). Eg.
Bupivacaine, Ketamine.

# Jaundice

**Jaundice** In determining the cause of hyperbilirubinaemia:

# Jehovah's Witnesses

**Jehovah's Witnesses** often (but not always) refuse to receive
allogeneic blood products. Their perioperative management is guided by
three principles:

1. Careful discussion of the precise limits the patient wishes to place
upon treatment. (some patients will accept pre-donation of red cells,
cell salvage, and cardiopulmonary bypass).

2. Preservation of red blood cells

a. Start high: use EPO

b. Dilute losses: haemodilution

c. Prevent bleeding: regional anaesthetic, elevate site, use
desmopressin ( \\uparrow factor VIII) and tranexamic acid
(anti-fibrinolytic)

3. Survival of profound anaemia: hypothermia, neuromuscular blockade,
100% oxygen, hyperbaric oxygen.

# Ketoacidosis

arises from accumulation of three-carbon leftovers following fatty acid
metabolism by β-oxidation. β-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate.

Occurs in untreated diabetes mellitus Type I, alcohol intoxication,
starvation (exacerbated by pregnancy), and rarely due to an avquired
enzyme defect causing pyroglutamic aciduria.

# Kidney. (

**Kidney. (** See **nephron.** ) Functions:

? cartoon of 'regulating Reg'?

\-

\- Blood pressure

\- Acid-base homeostasis

-Electrolyte and water balance

<span class="underline">R</span> emove toxins and metabolites

<span class="underline">E</span> ndocrine: EPO and 1,25
dihydroxycholecalciferol

<span class="underline">G</span> luconeogenesis.

Concentrates urine to a maximum of about 1200mOsm/l, therefore need to
maintain urine output of 0.5ml/kg/h to excrete daily solute load of
10mOsm/kg.

# Lactate

**Lactate**

<img src="images/image042.gif" width="178" height="134" />

# Laplace's law

**Laplace's law** initially referred to surface tension.

Pressure = T/r <sub>1</sub> + T/r <sub>2</sub> .

For a sphere, both radii are the same so P = 2T/r.

For a tube, one radius is infinity so P=T/r

# Larynx

**Larynx** consists of the hyaline thyroid, cricoid and arytenoid
cartilages. Mucosa is innervated from above by the internal branch of
the superior laryngeal nerve (SLN) and from below by the recurrent
laryngeal nerve (RLN). Both are branches of vagus. Traditionally,
intrinsic muscles are innervated by RLN, apart from cricothyroid which
is innervated by external branch of SLN.

The intrinsic muscles are:

Regulate tension in vocal chords: vocalis, cricothyroid, thyroarytenoid

Close glottis: interarytenoid; lateral cricoarytenoid.

  

RLN palsy: if *partial* , the chord lies in the midline (Semon's law
xxx). If *complete,* the chord lies half-adducted (the cadaveric
position).

# Laser

**Laser** Light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.
Electically excited atoms simultaneously discharge energy in a
monochromic, coherent, parallel beam of light.

xxx

# Latex allergy

**Latex allergy** has two presentations: Type 1 Hypersensitivity (2
<sup>nd</sup> most common cause of **anaphylaxis** under anaesthesia);
or type 4 hypersensitivity (T-cell mediated) causing contact dermatitis.
High risk in healthcare workers, mechanics, caterers, or if there is a
history of allergy to avocado, banana, chestnut or kiwi fruit. Up to 60%
of spina bifida patients are latex-sensitive, probably due to repeated
bladder catheterisation. Latex-free gloves, LMAs, ETTs, lines, and drug
ampoules should be used.

# Leakage current

**Leakage current** is current that flows along an alternative route
other than the designated conductors in a circuit. It may occur wherever
a potential difference occurs between electrical conductors -ie in all
electrical equipment. See **microshock** and **electricity** .

# Left ventricular pressure-volume curves

AS = Left ventricular *pressure* overload

AR = left ventricular volume overload; no isovolumetric relaxation

MS = left ventricular volume underload

MR - left ventricular volume overload; no isovulumetric contraction.

# Ligand

**Ligand** A molecule that binds to a **receptor.** (Latin, lig….xxx).
?always endogenous.

# Lithium

**Lithium** is a treatment for bipolar disorder and depression that has
a narrow **therapeutic index** .

# Liver

**Liver**

Over the course of evolution the liver has accumulated many functions.
To be honest, they are a bit of a MESS:

Acinus - hexagon - six triads, one central vein.

Zone 1 peri-triad (perivenous) gluconeogenesis

Zone 2

Zone 3 pericentral glycolysis, lipolysis, glucoronidation

xxx

# Local anaesthetic toxicity

**Local anaesthetic toxicity** Early symptoms: tinnitus, circumoral
parasthesiae, light-headedness. CNS toxicity: convulsions, coma. Cardiac
toxicity: refractory ventricular dysrhythmia.

Management (see **emergencies** ):

Seizures: benzodiazepines/thiopentone/propofol.

Cardiac arrest: ALS algorithm. Give intralipid, consider
cardio-pulmonary bypass.

Intralipid dose for a 70kg patient would be:

\- 100ml bolus.

\- Start infusion 400ml over 20min.

\- Two more 100ml boluses at 5 and 10min.

\- 400ml over 10min.

After arrest, replace intralipid on arrest trolley, tell the NPSA, take
blood for measurement of local anaesthetic and lipid concentrations.

# Local Anaesthetics

**Local Anaesthetics** act by blocking Na+ channels on nerve axons after
diffusing across the axonal membrane. They are weak bases so they are
more ionised in the relatively acidic intracellular space.

Lipid solubility determines potency.

Lower pKa determines faster onset.

Protein binding determines duration of action.

Structure consists of an aromatic group bound to a hydrophilic group by
an ester or amide bond.

Esters: Amethocaine, procaine, cocaine (??dibucaine) - metabolised in
plasma (not cocaine) and by hepatic esterases.

Amides Prilocaine, lidocaine, ropivacaine, bupivacaine are metabolised
by amidases xxx xxx xxx check!

Mechanism of action Na++ channels xxx

# Lumbosacral plexus

**Lumbosacral plexus** Femoral is formed from L,2,3,4 nerve roots.
Sciatic from L4,5; S1,2,3. Pudendal from S2,3,4 (important for pain in
stage 2 labour: 'S2,3,4, keeps your \[xxx\] feeling sore.).

<img src="images/image045.gif" width="178" height="217" />

Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, femoral nerve, and obturator nerve all
enter the femoral triangle.

# Lung

**Lung** Anatomy: total of 19 bronchopulmonary segments. Number of
segments removed surgically is directly proportional to post-operative
pulmonary function.

Functions:

\- Gas exchange

\- Acid-base homeostasis

\- Filtration of blood

\- Endocrine (converts angiotensin-1 to angiotensin-2; removes
endothelin-1, serotonin, bradykinin, Prostaglandin-F2 <sub>α</sub> ).

# Lung volumes

**Lung volumes** A *capacity* is the sum of two or more *volumes*.

# Magnesium

**Magnesium** Effectively acts as an intracellular Ca++ antagonist.
Inhibits IP3-gated Ca++ channels and IP3 binding.

\[need ref for this xxx\]

# Malignant hyperpyrexia (malignant hyperthermia)

**Malignant hyperpyrexia (malignant hyperthermia)** Genetic
susceptibility 1 in 5000 to 1 in 10000, usually autosomal dominant.
Complicates 1 in xxx anaesthetics. Susceptible individuals have on
average had 3 uneventful GAs before diagnosis. Precipitants: volatile
agents, suxamethonium, caffeine, emotional stress. Pathophysiology: loss
of skeletal muscle Ca <sup>++</sup> homeostasis; ryanodine receptor
defect xxx

Management:

*Diagnose:*

\- Masseter spasm (may be only manifestation)

\- Hypermetabolic state:

↑CO<sub>2</sub> ↑HR ↑RR ↑VO<sub>2</sub> ↓ S <sub>P</sub> O<sub>2</sub>

\- Hyperthermia, sweating

\- Unstable BP, arrhythmias.

*Treat:*

1. Get clean circuit, intubate, ventilate 3x normal

2. Give Dantrolene 1-2mg/kg up to 10mg/kg total

\- Decreases Ca++ release from SR.

3. Cooling: cool iv fluid, sponge skin with water

4. Ongoing management:

5. ICU management:

Continue dantrolene for 48hr (prevent retriggering)

Correct hypothermia

Treat pulmonary oedema

Monitor muscle oedema: compartment syndrome

6. Refer pt. To MH centre, Leeds.

\[Halsall, P.J. et al. *BJA CEPD Reviews* **3** , 5-9(2003).\]

# Mapleson classification of breathing systems

**Mapleson classification of breathing systems**

The key difference between SV and IPPV is the phase of the respiratory
cycle in which gas is lost through the valve. SV: during end-expiration
when the bag is full; IPPV: during inspiration.

<img src="images/image047.gif" width="68" height="68" /> FGF:MV for SV
and IPPV <img src="images/image049.gif" width="97" height="83" />

# Mean

**Mean** Average of a **data** set. Mean = ∑ x/n. (see **median** and
**mode** ).

# Median

**Median** The middle value from any *ordinal* data set. (see **data**
). If there is an even number of numerical data points, then the average
of the middle two data points is the median. (See **mean** and **mode**
)

# Median nerve

**Median nerve** forms anterior to the distal third of the axillary
artery from the lateral and medial cords of the **brachial plexus.** It
travels lateral to the brachial artery until halfway down the humerus,
when it crosses over in front of the artery (1 in 7 pass behind) and
then passes medial to the brachial artery into the **antecubital fossa**
. It adheres to the deep side of flexor digitorum superficialis through
the forearm but emerges to close to the wrist before passing under the
flexor retinaculum. At this point it lies between palmaris longus and
flexor carpi radialis.

# Methaemoglobinaemia

**Methaemoglobinaemia** occurs when Hb is oxidised from the ferrous Fe
<sup>2+</sup> to the ferric ('makes you sick') Fe <sup>3+</sup> form.
Precipitants: inherited deficiency; drugs xxx Treatment: methylene blue.

# Meyer-Overton observation

**Meyer-Overton observation** potency of volatile anaesthetics increases
with lipid solubility.

<img src="images/image051.gif" width="127" height="91" />

Note logarithmic scales. Include labels xxx.

# MIC

**MIC** Minimum inhibitory concentration. The lowest concentration of an
antimicrobial agent that inhibits growth …xxx

# Michaelis-Menten

**Michaelis-Menten** equation.

S=E=ES=P

V=Vmax\*S/KM+S.

Therefore when:

S ≫ KM, V=Vmax

S=KM, V= ½ Vmax

S ≪ KM, V=0

Exactly the same maths calculates receptor occupancy, so a
**dose-response** **curve** is the same shape. I??xxx

Fraction of receptors occupied = \[ligand\]/(\[ligand\]+K <sub>A</sub> )

K <sub>A</sub> = affinity constant.

# Microshock

**Microshock** is a small electrical shock that may cause harm depending
on where it is delivered.

See **leakage current.**

# Minimal monitoring

**Minimal monitoring** AAGBI guidelines

# Mitochondrial metabolism

**Mitochondrial metabolism**

Krebs cycle

Electron transport chain

4 electrons to one O2 to avoid O2- production

ATPase

\[see www.johnkyrk.com\]

# Mitral stenosis

**Mitral stenosis**

&lt;1cm = severe

Dependent on atrial contraction for filling. (Up to 40% of CO).

During anaesthesia -

Not too slow - decreased stroke volume

Not too fast - decreased stroke volume

# Mode

**Mode** . The most commonly occurring value in a dataset. (See **mean**
and **median** ).

# Monro-Kellie doctrine

**Monro-Kellie doctrine**

\[Monro, A. (Creech and Johnson, Edinburgh: 1783).\]

\[Kellie, G. *Trans Med Chir Soc (Edinburgh)* **1** , 84(1821).\]

# MRI

**MRI** Principle: protons spin like the earth, and precess (wobble) on
their axis. A moving charge induces a magnetic field. So all protons are
like tiny, randomly aligned magnets.

In the powerful constant magnetic field in the scanner, all the protons
in a patient are assorted randomly along the longitudinal axis. A
radiofrequency (RF) pulse is fired across the patient from a coil,
causing the protons to line up transversely, and in synchrony. When the
RF pulse ceases, the protons return to the longitudinal arrangement. As
they do so they release energy, causing two detectable signals:

T1 - return of the longitudinal magnetic field.

T2 - loss of the transverse magnetic field.

The scan sequence can be altered to detect each of these signals. On
T1-weighted scans fat is bright, water is dark, grey matter is grey, and
white matter is white. On T2-weighted scans, fat is bright, water is
bright, grey matter is grey, and white matter is dark. Cortical bone is
always dark, since the protons are immobile, and air is dark, because
there are very few protons.

Anaesthesia for MRI has numerous difficulties:

\- remote, cramped, and unfamiliar site

\- ferromagnetic objects accelerate in the magnetic field

\- the magnetic field induces a current in electrical wires, interfering
with monitoring and potentially causing burns on the patient.

\- **Pacemakers** will initiate their programmed 'magnet response'.

# Mucosa

**Mucosa** in the gut has four layers:

\[XXX Diagram p248 Wheater\]

# Muscle fibres

**Muscle fibres** Type 1 slow; type 2 fast.

# Muscular dystrophy

**Muscular dystrophy** Duchenne: X-linked, severe: onset age 3-4,
wheelchair-bound by age 10, death from respiratory or cardiac failure
often before age 20.

Becker: 'Benign X-linked': onset age 5-20, usually wheelchair-bound
after 25 years of disease.

Examination: male child, waddling lordotic gait. Similar, rarer
conditions may affect girls.

Abnormality in both diseases is in the *dystrophin gene* , which codes
for a muscle cytoskeletal protein important in interaction of
sarcoplasmic reticulum with plasma membrane.

Anaesthetic problems:

\- Respiratory failure, kyphoscoliosis

\- Rhabdomyolysis precipitated by suxamethonium or prolonged exposure to
**inhalational anaesthetics** (this is not MH, but is similar).

\- Cardiomyopathy.

\- Delayed gastric emptying.

# Myasthenia gravis

**Myasthenia gravis** Autoimmune (IgG mediated) destruction of
**acetylcholine receptors.** Similar to Eaton-Lambert myasthenic
syndrome which occurs in association with malignancy, usually lung.
Examination:

Treated with anticholiseterases (xxx), immunosuppression,
plasmapheresis, thymectomy.

For anaesthetic: stop anticholinesterase, use anticholinergic premed to
counteract vagal potentiation, use small doses of atracurium or
vecuronium, have ITU bed available post-op.

# Myotonic dystrophy

**Myotonic dystrophy** (dystrophia myotonica). Usually AD, M&gt;F. Gene
defect is trinucleotide repeat. Examination: frontal balding, ptosis,
cataracts, global muscle wasting. Difficulty releasing grip eg.
following handshake. Percussion myotonia - tapping thenar eminence or
tongue causes it to contract.

Avoid sux.

# National audit projects (NAP)

**National audit projects (NAP)** Run by the RCA.

# Needlestick injury, r

**Needlestick injury, r** isk of transmission of infection from:

xxx

# Neonates

**Neonates**

Rapid hypoxia

Rapid hypoglycaemia

Rapid hypothermia

Surface area to volume ratio

Non-shivering thermogenesis

Small FRC

Rate-dependent cardiac output

Rate-dependent ventilation

Diaphragmatic breathing

Tracheomalacia

Retrolental fibroplasias

\+ **paediatric airway**

# Nephron image

**Nephron image**

<img src="images/image053.gif" width="178" height="129" />

# Neuroleptic malignant syndrome

lead pipe rigidity

# Neuromuscular blockade

**Neuromuscular blockade**

Prolonged by:

↑CO<sub>2</sub> ↑HCO <sub>3</sub> <sup>-</sup> ↓ K+ <sup>+</sup> ↑Li+
<sup>+</sup> ↑Ca <sup>++</sup> ↑ Mg <sup>++</sup> ↓ T.

(Think of a COPD patient on frusemide being treated for manic
osteoporotic bronchospasm in a fridge).

# Nitric oxide

**Nitric oxide** vasodilator, toxic, cGMP.

# Nitrogen balance

**Nitrogen balance** = (nitrogen ingested - nitrogen excreted). Negative
in catabolic states. Excreted nitrogen is the sum of urinary nitrogen
(urea), change in blood nitrogen (urea) and other losses such as
proteinuria.

# Nitrogen washout, single breath (Fowler's method)

Measures the anatomical deadspace, closing capacity.

Subject breathes air, then takes a breath of 100% O2 (starting at FRC)
before exhaling slowly and completely (to RV) into a nitrogen analyser.

# Nitrous oxide

**Nitrous oxide** is the only drug that has been used continuously
throughout the history of anaesthesia. Intrinsic NMDA antagonism which
may cause neurotoxicity that is attenuated by concurrent use of GABA
agonist.

Problems:

Increases **CMRO<sub>2</sub>** , CBF, and ICP.

Increased PONV

Increased pressure in enclosed gas spaces (Absolute pressure increase =
P <sub>A</sub> N <sub>2</sub> O), increased volume in compliant gas
spaces (Relative volume increase = F <sub>I</sub> N <sub>2</sub> 0/(1-F
<sub>I</sub> N <sub>2</sub> O).

Inhibits methionine synthetase, a key enzyme of **folate**
**metabolism** , causing neurologic deficits in B12-deficient patients,
and exacerbating hyperhomocysteinaemia leading to increased risk of
dementia, and **thrombembolism** .

Surgical wound infection.

See **inhalational agents.**

# NMDA receptor

**NMDA receptor** excitatory ligand-gated cation channel. Regulates Ca++
and Na++ influx.

Sites for glutamine, glycine, Zn++.

# Noradrenaline

**Noradrenaline** See **catecholamines.**

# Normal distribution

**Normal distribution** (Gaussian distribution): bell-shaped and
symmetrical about the mean ( **median** = **mean** = **mode** ). One of
several preconditions defining parametric **data**
.<img src="images/image055.gif" width="142" height="74" />

x-axis shows standard deviations away from the mean. Usually about 5% of
the values lie more than 2 standard deviations away from the mean
(shaded area xxx shading!).

# Nose

**Nose** anatomy thereof… xxx

Blood supply: above: anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries (common
sources of epistaxis); below: branches of maxillary artery. Veins drain
into facial and ophthalmic veins - importantly for zitty adolescents,
some venous drainage enters cavernous sinus.

# Nucleic acids

**Nucleic acids** are made up of bases (eg. adenine) bound to ribose or
deoxyribose to make a nucleoside (eg. adenosine) and phosphorylated at
the 5' or 3' position to make a nucleotide. Bases can be purines
(adenine, guanine) or pyrimidines (cytosine, thymine, uracil).

Pyrimidines: Thymine production requires **folate** , and is prevented
by inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase (eg. Methotrexate) or
methionine synthetase (eg. **Nitrous oxide** ).

# Nutrition

**Nutrition** Requirements per day:

Enteral nutrition reduces stress ulceration of gastric mucosa, maintains
gut perfusion, bile flow, and mucosal barrier integrity. Complications
include misplacement of NG tube, gastric stasis, diarrhoea (60% of
patients), electrolyte and LFT derangement.

Total parenteral nutrition consists of simple nutritional components:
amino acids, glucose, electrolytes, and fat emulsion (10% or 20%). It
causes impairment of innate and acquired immunity, hepatic steatosis,
cholestasis, and excess blood levels of all of the constituents:
hyperglycaemia, lipaemia, hypernatraemia.

Non-essential amino acids such as glutamate and arginine become
conditionally essential in critical illness. Glutamate is the precursor
of the intracellular antioxidant, glutathione, and is a primary energy
source for enterocytes. Arginine is the source of NO, but far from
worsening shock, current evidence suggests that arginine supplementation
may improve outcome in sepsis.

# Nystagmus 

Pendular nystagmus - common in babies and blind

# Obesity

**Obesity** ( **BMI** &gt;30; morbid obesity BMI &gt;40 or BMI &gt;35
with comorbidity) is associated with the disease:

*Airway* :

\- **OSAHS** : 5%

*Respiratory* :

\- Obesity hypoventilation syndrome - may progress to pulmonary
hypertension, *cor pulmonale* .

*Cardiovascular* :

\- Hypertension: 50% of obese patients, causes myocardial hypertrophy
and may lead to heart failure. ('Obesity cardiomyopathy').

\- Diabetes mellitus: 5x population risk

\- Ischaemic heart disease

\- DVT/PE: risk is double the population risk.

*Neurological:*

\- Benign intracranial hypertension

*Gastrointestinal:*

\- Reflux and hiatus hernia.

Pharmacology is important:

Total body water is a smaller percentage of body weight.

\[Lotia, S. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **8** ,
151-156(2008).\]

# Obsolete anaesthetic agents

**Obsolete anaesthetic agents** An exam classic. Genius.

Althesin - anaphylaxis common due to preservative.

Methoxyflurane - Fluoride ions, high-output renal failure.

Cyclopropane - explosive.

Halothane - fulminant autoimmune hepatitis.

Xxx - one interesting fact about each.

# Obstetric anaesthesia: key lists

**Obstetric anaesthesia: key lists**

CEMACH

# Ohm's Law

**Ohm's Law** See **Flow** .

# One-lung ventilation

**One-lung ventilation** is indicated for….

*<span class="underline">Surgical access</span>* : VATS, TAAA,
Pneumonectomy / lobectomy, oesophagectomy, bronchial surgery,
mediastinal surgery.

: infection, haemorrhage

*<span class="underline">Protect sick lung</span>* :

● Unilateral cyst/bulla

● Unilateral bronchial lavage

*<span class="underline">Improve ventilation/gas exchange</span>* :

● Bronchial injury

● B-P fistula

● Hypoxia due to unilateral lung disease

Management of hypoxia during one-lung ventilation.

1. Oxygenation/ventilation of the *<span class="underline">unventilated
lung</span>* :

● Increase F <sub>I</sub> O<sub>2</sub> to the ventilated lung
(relatively ineffective because of the physiology of **shunt** ) xxx

● Low flow O<sub>2</sub> for apnoeic oxygenation

● Interrupting surgery for intermittent ventilation of the lung

● Some thoracic surgery will be unaffected by continuous ventilation
both lungs

2. *<span class="underline">Decrease shunt</span>* flow by clamping
pulmonary artery to unventilated lung

3. *<span class="underline">Increase cardiac output</span>* . This
improves tissue oxygen delivery, so the **tissue oxygen extraction** is
less, so venous blood has a higher C <sub>v</sub> O<sub>2</sub> ,

# Opiates

**Opiates** are opioids derived from naturally-occurring substances.
Endogenous opiate-like substances include endorphins, enkephalins, xxx.
They all share the core tetrapeptide Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe.

# Opioid receptors

**Opioid receptors** are defined by their prototype ligands:

# Opioids

**Opioids** are **ligands** for **opioid receptors** .

# Orbit

**Orbit** see **eye** .

# Organophosphorus poisoning

**Organophosphorus poisoning** kills 200,000 worldwide each year.
Self-poisoning with insecticides is common in Asia. Nerve gas agents
(eg. Sarin) are rarely used but potential terrorist weapons.
Organophosphates Inhibit cholinesterases causing excessive ligation of
nicotinic and muscarinic ACh receptors. Therefore:

Treatment: Atropine, Pralidoxime, Diazepam

Experimental: NaHCO <sub>3</sub> , Mg <sup>++</sup> , FFP, CVVHF.

\[Eddleston, M. et al. *The Lancet* **371** , 597-607\]

# OSAHS (obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnea syndrome)

**OSAHS (obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnea syndrome)** diagnosed at
polysomnography. Predicts difficult intubation. Treated with CPAP. May
lead to hyperuricaemia, polycythaemia, pulmonary hypertension, cor
pulmonale.

# Oscillotonometer

**Oscillotonometer**

SBP at 25% of MAX

MAP at MAX

DBP at 80% of MAX

(from RCoA final book).

# Osmolarity

**Osmolarity** is number of osmoles in a litre of specific solvent

*Osmolality* is number of osmoles xxx in a kilogram of xxx.

*Osmotic pressure* is the hydrostatic pressure required to oppose
movement of water across a semipermeable membrane to or from a given
solution. This assumes an ideal membrane permeable only to water.

*Tonicity* is effective osmolality at a real cell membrane. Some
molecules, such as glucose, move across the cell membrane, so they are
*ineffective* *osmoles* and hence contribute little to tonicity.

Van't Hoff's law osmotic pressure π = ΘciRT.

Osmolarity = Θci

Mystery is Θ. This corrects for the difference in behaviour of real
solutions from ideal. Eg. NaCl Θ = 0.93. So for a 154mM solution of
NaCl, osmolality is 286, not 308 as predicted.

Colligative properties are dependent on concentration rather than
chemical properties. They are: osmotic pressure, freezing point
depression, vapour pressure depression, increase in boiling point.

In °C, ΔTf = 1.86 Θci

From NPSA report on hypotonic saline in kids: \[xxx note that osmolarity
is wrong since Θ is not taken into account\]

# Oxidation

**Oxidation** is loss, reduction is gain of electrons ('OIL RIG').

# Oxidative metabolism

**Oxidative metabolism** Of glucose, follows the formula:

C <sub>6</sub> H <sub>12</sub> O <sub>6</sub> + 6O<sub>2</sub> →
6CO<sub>2</sub> + 6H <sub>2</sub> O.

For any fat, protein or carbohydrate of general formula (C <sub>c</sub>
H <sub>h</sub> O <sub>o</sub> ), the number of oxygen molecules needed
for complete oxidation (to CO2 and H2O) is given by: c + h/4 - o/2. See
**glycolysis** , and **mitochondrial metabolism.**

# Oxygen

**Oxygen** see **gases** .

# Oxygen consumption (VO2)

**Oxygen consumption (VO2)** Normally 3.8ml/kg.

# p

The probability that the **null hypothesis** is true. By convention, if
p &lt; 0.05, the null hypothesis is taken to be false. If multiple
comparisons are performed, the p-value for significance is divided by
the number of comparisons (eg for 5 comparisons, p &lt; 0.01 is needed
for significance; this is the *Bonferroni correction* ).

# Pacemakers

**Pacemakers** Nomenclature: 3 or 5 letters, eg. DDDOO.

\[Bernstein, AD, Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2002; 25:260.\]

'Magnet response': most pacemakers alter their function in response to
application of a magnet above the pacemaker box. Most often, this simply
reverts the pacemaker to a demand mode at a rate of 60/min. However,
there is a variety of responses, some of which may involve the complete
cessation of cardiac output, which can lead to end-organ damage. Not
advisable.

# PaCO2

**PaCO2** is wholly determined by the equation:

PaCO2 = VCO2/VA. Since metabolism is almost always constant, this means
that PaCO2 is usually determined by alveolar ventilation.

# Paediatric airway

**Paediatric airway**

Large occiput

Small mouth

Large tonsils

Pliant submental tissues

Long, stiff epiglottis

*High anterior larynx*

*Narrowest point is cricoid ring*

Short trachea

# Paeds formulae

**Paeds formulae**

ETT internal diameter (mm) = age/4+4

ETT length (cm) = age/2 + 12

Estimated weight = age x 2 + 8

*Age over four plus four:*

*Endotracheal tube bore.*

*Age over two plus twelve -*

*Tells you how deep to delve.*

*Age times two plus eight -*

*Tells you the child's weight.*

# Pain

**Pain** is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated
with actual or potential tissue damage and described in terms of such
damage (WHO consensus statement).

Chronic pain is pain that persists after resolution of tissue damage (or
&gt;3 months). (See **neuropathic pain** ).

# Pancreatitis

**Pancreatitis** Caused by gallstones, ethanol, trauma, steroids, mumps,
a, s, h, e, d. Mortality is xxx% and stubbornly unaffected by different
treatments.

In severe pancreatitis, the aims of surgical management are:

1. Releive biliary obstruction

2. Minimise organ damage

3. Remove *infected* necrosis + embolisation or balloon tamponade in the
1-3% of patients who have massive haemorrhage from a splenic artery
pseudoaneurysm.

Xxx need prognostic significance

# Paracetamol toxixity

**Paracetamol toxixity** low-risk treatment threshold 150mg/kg/day, high
risk threshold is half that dose. At treatment threshold, mortality
without treatment is 5%. High-risk groups: are those with low hepatic
glutathione reserves, existing liver disease or induced **cytochrome
P450** enzymes eg: alcoholism, anorexia, anti-epileptics

\[Diagram: Paracetamol - sulphation/glucoronidation - solubilised for
excretion (safe metabolism). When this is overwhelmed, CytP450
metabolism to NAPQI,\]

A mortality of &gt;90% in paracetamol poisoning is indicated by: 1. PT
&gt; 100s; 2. Creatinine &gt; 300μmol/l; 3. H <sup>+</sup> &gt;
50nmol/l.

Xxx ref and and/or??

# Parasympathetic

**Parasympathetic** nervous system. Cranio-sacral.

Cranial: CN III, VII, IX, X.

Sacral: S2,3,4.

Synapse at viscera - post-synaptic neurones are short.

Nicotinic ACh at ganglia, muscarinic at viscera.

# Parathyroid hormone

**Parathyroid hormone** causes phosphate loss into urine in PCT and Ca++
resorption in DCT. Like aldosterone resorbs Na++ and loses K+.

# Partial pressure

**Partial pressure** is defined by Dalton's law (' *Dalton defines'* )
which states that the total pressure is equal to the sum of the
pressures exerted by each gas in a mixture.

# Partial pressure of a gas dissolved in a liquid

**Partial pressure of a gas dissolved in a liquid** is a perplexing
concept: it is defined as being equal to the partial pressure of that
gas in a mixture of gases in equilibrium with the liquid. Normally there
is a linear relationship between partial pressure the and dissolved gas
content ( **Henry's law** ) but this is not the case with oxygen (see
**Haemoglobin** ) or **carbon dioxide** dissolving in blood.

# Pericardial effusions

**Pericardial effusions** are caused by

*<span class="underline">T</span>* uberculosis

*<span class="underline">U</span>* raemia

*<span class="underline">M</span>* yocardial infarction

*<span class="underline">O</span>* ther infections - xxx

*<span class="underline">U</span>* raemia again - it is very common

*<span class="underline">R</span>* heumatoid arthritis

(And also by exposure to high altitude.)

\[Thompson, A.A.R. et al. *Heart* **92** , 539-40(2006).\]

# Phaeochromocytoma

**Phaeochromocytoma** Chromaffin cell tumour, secretes catecholamines.

10% extra-adrenal

10% malignant

10% bilateral

Xx% associated with NF1, MEN2 or von Hippel-Lindau.

Alpha blockade - phenoxybenzamine

Beta blockade (never as initial therapy)

# Pharmacodynamics

**Pharmacodynamics** 'effect of drug on body': drug-receptor
interaction.

Log Dose response curve; partial agonist

Isobologram

# Pharmacokinetics

**Pharmacokinetics** 'effect of body on drug': *absorption,
distribution, metabolism* and *excretion* (see also **clearance, protein
binding** and **area under curve** ).

\[xxx check maths!\]

For first-order kinetics:

<img src="images/image059.gif" width="400" height="136" />

k is the rate constant.

1/k is the time constant, τ.

t <sub>½</sub> = τ \* ln(2)

Volume of distribution = V <sub>D</sub>

Mass of drug = Concentration \* V <sub>D</sub>

dC/dt = kC so dMass/dt = kC \* V <sub>D</sub>

So *clearance* dVol/dt = kC \* V <sub>D</sub> / C = k\*V <sub>D</sub> =
V <sub>D</sub> /τ

Since clearance also = Dose/AUC (see **area under curve** ), V
<sub>D</sub> can be calculated:

V <sub>D</sub> /τ = Dose/AUC

V <sub>D</sub> = τ \*Dose/AUC

# Phosphate

Fractional phosphate excretion calculated in the same way as
**Fractional Sodium Excretion**.

# Phosphodiesterase inhibitors

**Phosphodiesterase inhibitors**

Methylxanthines - caffeine, theophylline

PDE3 - milrinone

PDE5 - sildenafil, tadalafil.

# Phrenic nerve

**Phrenic nerve** arises from C3,4,5 (keeps the diaphragm alive) and
passes down over scalenus anterior (see **C6 slice** ) before passing in
front of the subclavian artery and behind the subclavian vein to enter
the thorax. It descends in the mediastinum, just medial to the pleura.
On the right it runs lateral to the great veins. On the left, it passes
just lateral to the left ventricle. The phrenic nerve is the only
innervation of the **diaphragm** .

Xxx crosslinks

# pK

**pK** is the pH at which 50% of an acid or base is ionised.

y-axis: percent ionised.<img src="images/image056.jpg" width="400" />
# Placenta

**Placenta** . Drugs pass a lipid bilayer to cross the placenta.

<span class="underline">Lipid solubility</span> : Hydrophilic drugs
transfer slowly through sparse aqueous channels. Rate is according to
**Fick's law of diffusion** . Lipophilic drugs cross freely, so delivery
to the foetus is essentially determined by placental blood flow.

<span class="underline">Protein binding</span> : highly protein-bound
drugs in plasma have a relatively low 'free' concentration to diffuse
across the placenta

<span class="underline">Ionisation</span> : highly ionised molecules do
not cross. 'Ion trapping' occurs when a molecule becomes ionised on the
more acidic foetal side of the placenta.

# Plasmapheresis

Just like haemofiltration but plasmafilter allows molecules &gt; 500kD
to pass.

An effective treatment for disorders mediated byt circulating proteins
or antibodies, e.g.:

-   TTP
-   Guillan-Barre
-   Cryoglobulinaemia
-   Myasthenia Gravis
-   Goodpasture's

# Plateau pressure

**Plateau pressure** An estimate of the pressure applied to the small
airways, measured during an inspiratory breath hold. May be very
divergent from peak pressure, eg. in bronchoconstriction when Ppeak ≫
Pplat.

# Pneumonia

**Pneumonia**

Organisms: strep. Pneumo ('pneumococcus') causes effusion.

Hospital-acquired pneumonia

Commonest cause = enterobateriaciae

Ventilator-associated pneumonia

# Pneumoperitoneum

**Pneumoperitoneum** causes a vagal reflex bradycardia, increased SVR,
decreased CO, diaphragmatic splinting, and hypercarbia (absorption of
CO2 insufflation gas). Complications include gas embolism, IVC
compression, **pneumothorax** .

# Pneumothorax

**Pneumothorax** May be mimicked by a large bulla or diaphragmatic
hernia.

(See **chest drain** ).

\[Paramasivam, E. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **8** ,
204-209(2008).\]

# Polyneuropathy

**Polyneuropathy** may be caused by:

Alcohol/TB therapy (isoniazid)/

HIV/leprosy

Diabetes/chemotherapy

SLE/PAN

Sarcoidosis

Hypothyroidism

Freidrich's/Refsum's/Charcot-Marie Tooth Syndrome

# Porphyria

**Porphyria** A group of diseases caused by enzyme defects in **haem**
synthesis. Intermediate compounds (porphyrins) are released into blood
causing symptoms, which range from photosensitivity to acute abdominal
pain, vomiting, acidosis(xxx), psychosis, convulsions and coma.
Peripheral and autonomic neuropathy may also occur. Diagnosis is by
detection of porphyrins in urine and stool. Two types: acute
intermittent porphyria (autosomal dominant) and variegate porphyria (xxx
inheritance) cause severe illness following anaesthesia.

Acute attacks are precipitated by physiological stresses including
infection, starvation, menstruation, or drugs. The **enzyme inducing
drugs** are particularly dangerous (PC-BRAS)(xxx check them all!). These
increase the production of D-aminolaevulinic acid (D-ALA).

All of the induction agents are reported to be dangerous, but propofol
and ketamine have been used safely. Opiods and suxamethonium are also
considered safe. What more do you need?

# Post-dural puncture headache (PDPH)

**Post-dural puncture headache (PDPH)** . More likely with large or
cutting needle, inexperienced practitioner. Symptoms: postural headache
(onsets on sitting up, relieved by lying down), classically felt at
upper pole of cranium, persistent, associated with shoulder pain,
tinnitus, occasionally cranial nerve signs. Fatal subdural haematoma
reported. Treatment with analgesia, caffeine, and if persistent,
epidural blood patch.

PDPH is more likely with young patients, big needles, cutting needles.
Treatment may include:

\- analgesia: poor efficacy

\- caffeine

\- ACTH infused iv followed by 6h bedrest

\- Epidural blood patch

# Post-operative nausea and vomiting (PONV)

**Post-operative nausea and vomiting (PONV)**

Risk factors:

Apfel score (ref) xxx

Treatment:

# Potency

**Potency** The ratio between equiactive doses.

Potency = **ED <sub>50</sub>** of Drug A / **ED <sub>50</sub>** of Drug
B.

# Power

**Power** 1. Rate of **work.** 1W = 1J/s

# Power (statistical)

**Power (statistical)** 2. Statistical power - measure of probability of
an experiment discovering a true difference.

# Poynting effect

**Poynting effect** . Oxygen dissolves in liquid N <sub>2</sub> O,
causing it to evaporate above its pseudocritical temperature. See
**gases** .

# Pre-oxygenation

**Pre-oxygenation** is accomplished by breathing 100% O<sub>2</sub> for
3min or 3 vital capacity breaths.

# Pregnancy, mortality

**Pregnancy, mortality** See **CEMACH.**

# Pregnancy, non-obstetric surgery

**Pregnancy, non-obstetric surgery** Main problems are:

\- Teratogenicity (main concern in 1 <sup>st</sup> trimester)

\- Premature labour (main concern in 2 <sup>nd</sup> trimester), may be
precipitated by surgery but this is unusual with the exception of
cervical xxx

\- Foetal hypoxia (main concern in late pregnancy). Ion trapping of
opiates in the foetus is a concern immediately before birth.

(See **placenta** )

# Pregnancy, physiological changes

**Pregnancy, physiological changes** Purpose: supply metabolic demands
of foetus, prepare for delivery.

Airway (the five Ts):

*<span class="underline">T</span>* ongue - increase in size

*<span class="underline">T</span>* ight larynx due to physiological
oedema/ pre-eclampsia

*<span class="underline">T</span>* ime - ↓ FRC and ↑metabolism cause
rapid desaturation

*<span class="underline">T</span>* oo much swelling of nasal mucosa to
pass N-P airway

*<span class="underline">B</span>* reasts get in the way of laryngoscope
handle. (Alleviated by head-up tilt, polio handle.)

Respiratory:

\- ↑V <sub>T</sub> by 50% ∴ ↑alveolar ventilation, P <sub>a</sub>
CO<sub>2</sub> falls by 1kPa, P <sub>a</sub> O<sub>2</sub> increases by
1kPa. Improves gradient for placental CO<sub>2</sub> clearance.

\- Diaphragmatic splinting

\- ↓ FRC by 20%. Supine at term, FRC ↓ by 50%.

Cardiovascular:

\- Na <sup>+</sup> and H2O retention ∴ ↑circulating volume (peak at
32weeks), ↑ **cardiac output** . **Blood volume** at term = 100mls/kg

\- ↓ **SVR** ∴ ↓ MAP

\- 10% increase in heart rate.

<img src="images/image061.gif" width="180" height="110" /> xxx copyright
need to draw own graph.

\[Temporal relationships between hormonal and hemodynamic changes in
early human pregnancy. Chapman AB; Kidney Int 1998 Dec; 54(6):2056-63.\]

\- Venous return diverted through epidural veins.

Neurological:

\- Emotional lability.

\- Anterior pituitary increases in size threefold.

Haematological:

\- Increase in red cell mass but overall haemodilution.

\- Hypercoagulable state: increases in clotting factors (II, XII, X),
decreased protein S, decreased responsiveness to protein C (see
**coagulation** ).

Renal

\- ↑RPF by 40%, ∴ ↑GFR.

\- Urinary stasis.

Gastrointestinal

\- decreased tone in lower oesophageal sphincter, pressure on stomach,
reflux.

Metabolic

\- VO<sub>2</sub> increases by 20%.

\- 30% fall in plasma cholinesterase (see **esterases** )

\- Circulating triglycerides increase threefold

\- cholesterol increases 50%.

\- Reset osmostat down to 270mOsm/l

Locomotor

\- global increase in ligament laxity.

# Pressure

**Pressure** is force per unit area. 1Pa = 1N/m <sup>2</sup> . Because
force has a vector (ie. it acts in a given direction), so does pressure
*.* This is key to understanding the **Venturi** effect.

Units of pressure

1 bar = 100kPa

1 atmosphere = 101.325kPa

# Pressure reversal effect

**Pressure reversal effect** caused by nitrogen…xxx

# Probabilities

**Probabilities** can be combined using:

*<span class="underline">Additive Rule</span>* :

Probability of A *or* B = probability of A + probability of B

*<span class="underline">Multiplicative Rule</span>* :

Probability of A *and* B = probability of A x probability of B

# Propofol

**Propofol** (see **intravenous anaesthetic agents** ). 2,6
diisopropylphenol

# Protein binding

**Protein binding**

# Pulmonary artery catheterisation

**Pulmonary artery catheterisation** waveforms xxx

# Pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP)

**Pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP)** measured at end-expiration,
mean normally 6-12mmHg. Indicative of LV end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP),
itself a surrogate for LV end-diastolic *stretch* (see Frank-Starling
mechanism).

PAWP &gt; LVEDP in mitral valve disease (MS/MR)

LVEDP &gt; PCWP in PEEP, **Aortic Regurgitation** , LVF, HCM.

?PE

# Pulmonary function tests

**Pulmonary function tests** include **spirometry** , measurement of
**lung volumes** , and **diffusing capacity** .

# Pulmonary vasoconstriction

**Pulmonary vasoconstriction** occurs in response to:

Hypoxia (opposite of systemic vessels), see **HPV** .

Acidosis (opposite of systemic vessels)

Hypercapnia (opposite of systemic vessels)

Polycythaemia

# Pulse oximetry

**Pulse oximetry** relies upon **Beer-Lambert law** applied to :

Oxy is bouncy

Reduced reduces

# Purines

**Purines** see **Nucleic acids.**

# Pyloric stenosis

**Pyloric stenosis** affects 4 times as many boys as girls, and 1 in 500
live births. Presents at 4 - 6 weeks with projectile vomiting after
feeds. An 'olive' may be felt in the right upper quadrant. It is a
medical but not a surgical emergency. Problems are dehydration and
electrolyte loss: ↓ K <sup>+</sup> ↓ H <sup>+</sup> ↓ Cl <sup>-</sup> .

Despite the alkalosis, urine is paradoxically acidic due to the action
of aldosterone. Pyloromyotomy is curative and may be undertaken when U+E
and ABG are normal.

# Pyrimidines

**Pyrimidines** see **Nucleic acids.**

# Q-T interval

**Q-T interval** from onset of Q wave to *end* of T wave. Corrected for
heart rate: QTc=Q-T/√R-R.

Shortened by: hyperkalaemia, hypercalcaemia, digoxin

Prolonged by: hypocalcaemia, hypothermia, haloperidol, droperidol,
clarithromycin, erythromycin, amiodarone, sotalol, methadone.

# R wave in V <sub>1</sub>

**R wave in V <sub>1</sub>** . ECG finding in: RBBB, True posterior MI,
**Wolf-Parkinson-White Type A** , dextrocardia, lead switch, xxx one
other.

# RAAS

**RAAS** . **Renin** - **angiotensin** - **aldosterone** system.

\[Xxx physiological importance NB alkalosis\]

# Radial nerve

**Radial nerve** arises from the posterior cord of the **brachial
plexus** and runs deep to the axillary artery before passing behind the
humerus in the spiral groove. It then enters the **antecubital fossa**
between brachialis and brachioradialis where it divides into terminal
branches. The xxx branch follows lateral to the radial artery into the
hand.

It provides motor innervation to the extensors of the forearm and hand.
Cutaneous sensory distribution is limited xxx, but deep sensation covers
much of the hand and radial side of the forearm.

# Rapid sequence induction

**Rapid sequence induction** . Always check: 1. Optimal head position;
2. Tilting table; 3. Suction on and under pillow; 4. Fast-flowing drip;
5.

# Receptor

**Receptor** (see **drug targets** ). Cellular components bind
specifically to a **ligand** . There are three subtypes of receptor:
ligand-gated ion channels, second messenger receptors, and cytosolic
receptors.

*Ligand-gated ion channels* :

*Second messenger* :

G protein-coupled - all activate a protein kinase.

Gi - ↓ adenylate cyclase, ↓ cAMP. Protein Kinase A.

Gs - ↑adenylate cyclase, ↑cAMP. Protein Kinase A.

Gq - ↑phospholipase C, ↑ IP3 + DAG. Protein Kinase C.

G xxx - ↑guanylyl cyclase, ↑cGMP. Protein Kinase G.

Tyrosine Kinase: direct action phosphorylate proteins.

*Cytosolic* :

Steroid receptors

# Recombinant factor VIIa

**Recombinant factor VIIa**

Must have:

Major bleeding controlled

Platelets &gt; 50

Fib &gt;0.5 g/l

Should have:

Temp &gt;32

pH &gt; 7.2

Ca++ &gt; 0.9

NB 5% risk of thrombotic complications (MI/CVA)

# Red blood cell

**Red blood cell** See **erythrocyte.**

# Renal excretion

**Renal excretion** (See hepatic excretion).

*Filtration* - molecules &lt; 30kDa or highly positively charged
molecules are excreted unchanged in urine.

*Secretion in proximal tubules* - a limited capacity exists for
secretion of **acidic and basic drugs** . Thus at maximum excretion
rates, acidic drugs compete with each other, but not with basic drugs,
for secretion.

*Diffusion in distal tubules* - drugs may diffuse down a concentration
gradient in the distal tubules. Drugs diffuse across lipid membranes in
the unionised state, but are then trapped if they become ionised. Hence
acidic drugs get trapped in alkaline urine, because they dissociate in
alkaline conditions. This is used therapeutically in forced alkaline
diuresis in salicylate overdose.

# Renal failure

**Renal failure** - **acute.**

*Diagnosis* : the commonest causes are pre-renal, acute tubular necrosis
(ATN), and obstruction of the renal tract. In pre-renal failure there is
appropriate conservation of sodium, so it can be distinguished from ATN
by the **fractional sodium excretion (FENa)** (Pre-renal &lt; 1%; ATN
&gt;2%). **Haemodialysis** or **haemofiltration** is necessary when
there is hyperkalaemia, acidosis, or hypervolaemia.

Other rarer causes: myeloma, GN, RTA I II,

R - risk - &lt;0.5ml/kg/hr for xxx

I - injury - &lt;0.5ml/kg/hr for xxx

F - failure -

L - loss - 1 month

E - end-stage - 3 months0

# Renal failure - chronic

**Renal failure - chronic**

# Renin

**Renin** . Released in response to three stimuli:

1. ↓Na+ at macula densa

2. Sympathetic stimulation

3. Intrarenal baroreceptors

See **RAAS** .

# Research

**Research** is the single difference between responsible medical
practice and the quackery of the homeopaths. All doctors must understand
how science answers questions by experiment. The reason for this was
never better expressed than by Francis Bacon: 'The subtlety of nature is
many times greater than the subtlety of argument'. See **null
hypothesis** . {xxx create chain…}

\[Francis Bacon, essays, 15xx. Xxx\]

# Rheobase

**Rheobase** the minimum current required to depolarise a nerve given
infinite time (see also **chronaxie** ). xxx

\[rheobase graph\]

# Rhesus disease

**Rhesus disease** in pregnancy is caused by Rhesus +ve foetal red blood
cells entering maternal circulation.

# Rheumatoid arthritis

**Rheumatoid arthritis** is a multi-system connective tissue disorder
and its treatment has many complications. 25% of rheumatoid patients
have atlanto-axial instability.

# Risk Management

**Risk Management** has five steps:

\[Bould, M.D. et al. *Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain* **6** ,
240-243(2006).\]

# S-T segment depression

**S-T segment depression** is caused by

Acute MI

LV aneurysm

SAH

Pericarditis

# Sacral plexus

**Sacral plexus** See **lumbosacral plexus.**

# Salicylate poisoning

**Salicylate poisoning** usually caused by ingestion of aspirin or oil
of wintergreen. Nausea, tinnitus (quite reliably), hyperthermia,
progressing to metabolic acidosis, coma, pulmonary oedema.

Initial ABG shows respiratory alkalosis due to direct respiratory centre
stimulation. Then altered metabolism produces a raised **anion gap**
acidosis - predominantly a lactic acidosis and **ketoacidosis** .

Treatment is alkalinisation of urine to trap ionised salicylic acid (NB
hyperkalaemia must be aggressively corrected to achieve this) and
haemofiltration/dialysis.

Alkalosis preserves ionised salicylic acid in plasma, preventing
contamination of brain. Intubation usually obliterates the existing
respiratory alkalosis, leading to cerebral injury and death.

# Saturation vapour pressure (SVP)

**Saturation vapour pressure (SVP)** The partial pressure of a vapour
when it is in equilibrium with non-vapour phases. Varies with
temperature. When SVP = P <sub>B</sub> , boiling occurs. Hence at low
atmospheric pressures, boiling occurs at a lower temperature.

<img src="images/image064.jpg" width="400" />

\[Rodgers and Hill, BJA 50:415 (1978)\]

# Scalp

**Scalp** anaesthesia (eg. for awake craniotomy) is provided by blocking
five nerves:

Supratrochlear (CN V1)

Supraorbital (CN V1)

Zygomaticotemporal (CN V2)

Auriculotemporal (CN V3)

Greater auricular

# Scavenging

**Scavenging** Health and Safety Commission limits: N2O 100ppm,
Halothane 10ppm, Enflurane 50ppm, Iso 50ppm; 8hr time-weighted average.

Passive/ active systems.

30mm connector.

# Science

**Science**

# Scoring systems

**Scoring systems** in intensive care medicine xxx

# Sedation

**Sedation** see **conscious sedation** .

# Sensitivity

**Sensitivity** positivity in disease (see **contingency table** ).

# Sepsis

**Sepsis** is SIRS in the presence of known or presumed infection.

SIRS is the following:

CARS xxx

Severe sepsis is sepsis + at least one organ dysfunction:

Septic shock is severe sepsis + one of:

MAP &lt;60 (MAP &lt;80 if previously hypertensive) after resuscitation
(&gt;20ml/kg starch or &gt;40ml/kg saline or PCWP 12-20mmHg)

Dopamine &gt;5mcg/kg/min

Noradrenaline &lt;0.25 mcg/kg/min

Adrenaline &lt; 0.25mcg/kg.min

Aims of management:

Early (within 1h) effective *antibiotics* ;

Blood cultures before antibiotics;

Prompt imaging to find source;

Source control;

Early (within 6h) goal-directed resuscitation using fluid challenges to
restore filling pressure; measure lactate early, monitor CVP.

Vasopressors - noradrenaline or dopamine, MAP&gt;65mmHg

Inotropes - dobutamine

Refractory shock - stress-dose steroids

Target Hb 7-9g/dL unless hypoperfusion or ischaemic heart disease.

In ventilated patients:

Lung-protective ventilation - limit inspiratory plateau pressure; use
PEEP.

Elevate head of bed &gt;30°

Written weaning protocols

Sedation hold daily

Avoidance of neuromuscular blockers

Stress ulcer prophylaxis with H <sub>2</sub> -antagonist

Glycaemic control, target glucose &lt;150mg/dL

DVT prophylaxis

\[Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines, Critical Care Medicine xxx,
2008\]

# Serotonin (5-HT)

**Serotonin (5-HT)**

# Shock

**Shock** is inadequate organ perfusion. Causes: cardiogenic,
hypovolaemic or distributive (septic, anaphylactic, pharmacological,
spinal).

\[diagram of preload/contractility/afterload\]

ATLS classification of shock from blood loss:

The table lists the magnitude of the insult, three measures of the
sympathetic response (HR, RR and pulse pressure) and three measures of
the pathological consequences.

# Shunt

**Shunt** Abnormal passage of blood from one side of the circulation to
the other. Normally taken to mean right-to-left shunt: venous blood
passes from right side of heart to left side without encountering
alveolar gas. (See **V/Q mismatch** : shunt is Q without V.)
Physiological shunt occurs through bronchial circulation and Thebesian
veins.

# Shunt equation

**Shunt equation** Calculates *effective shunt* . The calculated shunt
fraction treats **venous admixture** as if it were pure shunt. Shunt is
different because it is not correctable by high FIO2 (see **shunt** ).

It is derived using the same algebra as **deadspace** .

Note that shunt is affected by Hb concentration, since Hb largely
determines the content of oxygen in the fraction of blood that passes
alveoli. However the RCoA book suggests that the college do not believe
this.xxx

# SI units

**SI units** see **units** .

# Sickle cell anaemia

**Sickle cell anaemia** AR. Incidence: &lt;1% of people of African
descent. Abnormal **haemoglobin (Hb)** (Glu to Val substitution at
position 6 in Hb β chain). HbS polymerises in hypoxia, causing
substantially decreased red cell deformability. Importantly, erythrocyte
membrane function and interaction with endothelium are altered.
Treatment: folate supplementation, hydroxyurea, transfusion.

HbSS (sickle disease) polymerises at 6.7kPa

HbAS (sickle trait) polymerises at 2-3kPa

Acute crises:

\- Acute pain (vaso-occlusive crisis) - may progress to multi-organ
failure with a **SIRS** response.

\- Acute sickle chest syndrome - may be precipitated by infarction, fat
embolism, infection, or *surgery* . Causes chest pain, pulmonary
infiltrate, and fever.

\- Acute severe anaemia:

o Splenic sequestration crisis. Vaso-occlusion within spleen leads to
removal of RBCs from circulation and rapidly enlarging splenomegaly. Rx:
transfusion, prevent further episodes with splenectomy. Mortality 15%.

o Aplastic crisis - transient cessation of erythropoesis. Follows
infection, often with parvovirus B19.

Other problems:

\- Pulmonary - 2/3 have asthma, 1/3 have sleep apnoea. Interstitial
fibrosis complicates recurrent acute chest events.

\- Liver disease - several causes may co-exist: hepatic infarction,
pigment gallstones, iron overload (from multiple transfusions).

\- Renal disease - sickling in renal capillaries (vasa recta).
Haematuria, proteinuria, hypertension are common. 1/3 of patients have
renal impairment.

\- Sepsis - increased susceptibility to infection (particularly
S.Pneumoniae) xxx ?? encapsulated organisms?

\- Pregnancy - low birth weight, pre-eclampsia, acute chest syndrome,
cerebral venous thrombosis, abruption, infection.

\- Stroke

\- Avascular necrosis of bone - may cause fat embolism.

\- Priapism

Anaesthesia: *avoid hypoxia, acidosis, hypovolaemia and hypothermia.*
High risk of acute chest syndrome and vaso-occlusive crises, but also
non-sickling complications of surgery (infection, organ failure).
Consider exchange transfusion pre-operatively for high risk cases.
Tourniquet use is controversial. xxx

# Six point seven kiloPascals

**Six point seven kiloPascals** A striking number of events happen at
6.7kPa. **HbSS** polymerisation, **brain death** testing threshold,
normal PvCO2, xxx

It neatly equates with a nice round number in the **pressure** units
favoured by North Americans: 50mmHg.

# Skeletal muscle contraction

**Skeletal muscle contraction** An action potential releases Ca++ from
T-tubules, which binds to troponin, initiating a conformational shift
that exposes myosin-binding sites on actin. Myosin binds, moves along
actin, and consumes an ATP. xxx

# Soda lime

**Soda lime** is 94% Ca(OH) <sub>2</sub> and 5% NaOH, with 15-19%
moisture content.

CO<sub>2</sub> + 2NaOH → Na <sub>2</sub> CO <sub>3</sub> + H
<sub>2</sub> O + heat

Na <sub>2</sub> CO <sub>3</sub> + Ca(OH) <sub>2</sub> → 2NaOH + CaCO
<sub>3</sub> .

# Specific Gravity

**Specific Gravity** is density relative to water for fluids, or air for
gases. It increases by 0.001 for every 2.7g/l of glucose dissolved. CSF
= 1.003-1.009; heavy bupivacaine = xxx.

# Specificity

**Specificity** negativity in health (see **contingency table** ).

# Spinal cord

**Spinal cord** cross-sectional anatomy and blood supply. For blood
supply see bricker xxx

# Spirometry

**Spirometry** can measure FEV <sub>1</sub> , FVC, flow: volume loops,
and reversibility to bronchodilators (a 12% rise in FEV <sub>1</sub>
indicates bronchodilator-responsiveness).

FEV1 is reduced in obstructive disease, FVC is reduced in restrictive
and obstructive disease.

Flow:volume loops can detect obstruction of the upper airway. A fixed
obstruction (eg. a calcified lesion in the trachea) limits flow in both
directions, causing a plateau in both inspiration and expiration. If
there is a dynamic extrathoracic obstruction, the narrowing gets smaller
during inspiration, when the pressure outside the trachea is greater
than the pressure inside the trachea. In contrast, a dynamic
intrathoracic narrowing gets bigger during inspiration because it is
pulled apart as the lungs expand, and the pressure in the trachea is
greater than the pressure in the thorax.

(diagrams).

\[Miller, R.D. et al. *Mayo Clin Proc* **44** , 145-61(1969).\]

# Splenectomy

**Splenectomy** Asplenic patients usually require lifelong prophylactic
penicillin. They are susceptible to infection by encapsulated organism:

-   Pneumococcus
-   Meningococcus
-   H. Influenzae
-   E. coli

# Spot above V or Q

**Spot above V or Q**

# Standard deviation (SD)

**Standard deviation (SD)** is a measure of the *spread* of values in a
data set. If data conform to the **normal distribution** , then 70% of
the values lie within 1 SD of the mean, and 95% of the values are within
2 SD of the mean. The standard deviation expressed as a percentage of
the mean, is called the *coefficient of variation* .

# Standard error in the mean (SEM)

**Standard error in the mean (SEM)** is a measure of how precisely the
true population mean is estimated by the sample mean. It is calculated
as the SD/√n. 95% **confidence interval** is the SEM x 1.96 (as long n
&gt; 20).

# Starling forces

**Starling forces** (see **diffusion** ).

Net fluid movement = k\[(P <sub>c</sub> -P <sub>i</sub> )-σ(π
<sub>c</sub> -π <sub>i</sub> )\]

k = filtration coefficient - a measure of membrane permeability to
*water* .

P <sub>c</sub> /P <sub>i</sub> = hydrostatic pressure in
capillary/interstitium

π <sub>c</sub> /π <sub>i</sub> = colloid oncotic pressure in
capillary/interstitium

σ = reflection coefficient - a measure of membrane permeability to
*proteins* . Why? xxx

\[Starling, E.H. *J Physiol.* **19** , 312-326(1896).\]

# Statistical tests

**Statistical tests** (See **Chi-squared test** , **p-value** )

To compare groups of parametric **data** , use Student's t-test; if
repeated measures, use analysis of variance (ANOVA).

To compare groups of non-parametric **data** : use Mann-Whitney u-test;
if repeated measures, use Kruskal-Wallis test.

# Status asthmaticus

**Status asthmaticus**

Oxygen

Salbutamol

Hydrocortisone

Ipratropium

Theophylline

Magnesium

ICU - ventilation, volatiles. Unfortunately low density gases such as
helium do not work because the obstruction is in the small airways where
flow is laminar.

Initial ventilator settings:

I:E 1:4

MV &lt;115 ml/kg

V <sub>T</sub> &lt;8 ml/kg

RR 10-14/min

Inspiratory flow 80 to 100 l/min (low Ti:Te ratio)

The main problem is hyperinflation. Complications (hypotension and
barotrauma) are predicted by end-inspiratory volume (Vei) above
functional respiratory capacity (&gt;20ml/kg is high risk). This can be
measured by collecting total exhaled volume in a paralysed patient over
60 seconds of apnoea.

Vei can be estimated by scaling up the VT to account for the effect of
intrinsic PEEP:

Vei = VT x Pplat/(Plat-PEEPi)

# Status epilepticus

**Status epilepticus** seizure activity for 30min, or intermittent
seizures without return of consciousness for 30min. Mortality is 25%,
mainly from brain damage and multi-organ failure. Seizure activity
causes fourfold increase in CBF and **CMRO<sub>2</sub>** , with
consequent rise in ICP.

Causes: idiopathic, genetic, tumour, trauma, stroke, MS.

Treatable causes: 'me-me-me'

*<span class="underline">m</span>* ass lesion, *<span
class="underline">e</span>* thanol,

*<span class="underline">m</span>* eningitis, *<span
class="underline">e</span>* ncephalitis,

*<span class="underline">m</span>* etabolic, *<span
class="underline">e</span>* lectrolyte:

o Ca++ ↑ / ↓

o Na+ ↑ / ↓

o Mg++ ↓

o Glucose ↓

Phase 1: recurrent seizures, **catecholamine** release

Phase 2:

↑ICP, failure of **autoregulation**

RESP: **Neurogenic pulmonary oedema**

CVS: ↓ BP

Haem: **DIC**

# Steady state

**Steady state** At steady state, reaction rates, flow rates, and
diffusion rates are constant, but not in equilibrium. True equilibrium =
death.

# Sterilisation

**Sterilisation** see **decontamination.**

# Steroid hormones

**Steroid hormones** Source, Go find rex, make good sex.
Mineralocorticoid effects, glucocorticoid effects. Steroid **receptors.
xxx**

# Stewart-Hamilton equation

**Stewart-Hamilton equation** calculates cardiac output by
thermodilution.

Q = V <sub>i</sub> (T <sub>bl</sub> -T <sub>i</sub> )/AUC

Principle is the same as other **area under curve** techniques.

# Stress response

**Stress response** to surgery, trauma, or burns is similar (xxx - how
similar?). Modifying it is often attempted, with mixed results. The core
elements are:

\- Acute phase response

\- Sympathetic nervous system activation

\- Sympathetic **RAAS** activation

\- **Hypothalamic** - **Pituitary** - **Adrenal** axis

\- Insulin

\- Vasopressin

Response is attenuated by regional anaesthesia or high dose opiates.
This may be desirable.

<img src="images/image067.gif" width="400" />

# Stridor

**Stridor** . Upper airway noise with breathing.

Inspiratory - obstruction above chords

Expiratory - obstruction below chords

Both - obstruction at or below chords

# Subarachnoid 

Dropped GCS
- sz
- hydrocephalus 
- vasospasm
- bleed
- infarct 

Show families the scans. 
Unsecured aneurysms are dangerous.
SAH with hypoxia = neurogenic pulm oedema.

# Subarachnoid haemorrhage

**Subarachnoid haemorrhage** xxx% aneurysm xxx%traumatic

World Federation of Neurosurgeons Classification:

Haemodynamic management traditionally 'Triple H': Hypertensive
Hypervolaemic Haemodilution. However, there is little evidence for
hypervolaemia and haemodilution may actually be deleterious. Some
experts now advocate 'Single N' therapy: noradrenaline to maintain MAP
&gt; 100.

# Sugammadex

**Sugammadex** Reversal agent for **neuromuscular blockers,** superior
to **anticholinesterases** because it does not have a *ceiling effect* .
A modified γ-cyclodextrin (therefore it is 8 glucose molecules in a ring
structure). C <sub>72</sub> H <sub>104</sub> O <sub>48</sub> S
<sub>8</sub> Na <sub>8</sub> ; MW=2178Da).

\[sketch of 8 rings, 8 sulphurs on 8 negatively charged hydrophilic side
chains, hydrophobic cavity\]

Encapsulates rocuronium (MW=610Da) and vecuronium, binds them avidly
with:

\- Van der Waals forces

\- Hydrophobic attraction

\- Electrostatic attraction

…and so rapidly decreases the concentration of free rocuronium in blood,
creating a large gradient for the diffusion of rocuronium away from the
NMJ. The complex is water soluble and renally excreted.

May also encapsulate (with much less affinity):

Verapamil

Oestrogens (possibly contraceptive hormones)

Cortisol

Atropine Large doses cause hypotension, QT prolongation.

# Suxamethonium

**Suxamethonium**

Structure

C-N-C-C-O-C-C-mirror

Binds to both α-subunits of **acetylcholine receptor** .

Dose according to actual, not ideal, body weight. Dose correlates best
with body surface area.

Infants: 3mg/kg; children 2mg/kg; adults 1mg.kg.

Side effects:

Bradycardia is profound on second dose ('second dose of sux kills') and
common in children, hence atropine premedication is often used. Effect
on ICP and IOP is dwarfed by effect of laryngoscopy. Sux myalgia
commonest in young women with early mobilisation and may be prevented by
small pre-emptive doses of atracurium, diazepam, iv lidocaine,
dantrolene, calcium, magnesium or even suxamethonium itself.

Hyperkalaemia risk highest in:

o Burns: avoid 3-56 days after the burn, peak risk 7-10 days.

o Spinal cord injury - denervation hyperkalaemia onsets after 48h, lasts
6-12 months xxx

o Neuromuscular disorders

o Myotonic dystrophy

o Hyperkalaemia

Contraindicated in sux apnoea, sux anaphylaxis (doh!), malignant
hyperthermia.

# Suxamethonium apnoea

**Suxamethonium apnoea** autosomal recessive. Carrier rate 1 in 25,
affects 1 in 2500 people.

Quantified in vitro using dibucaine number. Dibucaine is a local
anaesthetic that happens to inhibit *normal* plasma cholinesterase (see
**esterases** ). Abnormal forms of plasma cholinesterase are less
inhibited.

**Sympathetic nervous system** Anatomy, plexuses (see A-Z) physiology.
xxx

Cord - ventral root - white ramus communicans - symp chain or direct to
adrenal medulla - grey ramus communicans or direct to viscera.

Head T1-5

Heart T1-5

Arm T2-5

Leg T10-L2

\[sns\]Stellate ganglion

\[sns\]Superficial cardiac plexus - below aortic arch

\[sns\]Deep cardiac plexus - beneath tracheal bifurcation

\[sns\]Coeliac plexus L1

\[sns\]Lumbar sympathetic plexus

# T

**T** - temperature

SVP - saturation vapour pressure

FGF - Fresh gas flow rate

t <sub>insp</sub> .- inspiratory time

F - force

m - mass

a - acceleration

AUC - area under the curve

MOA - mechanism of action

n - the number of values in a data set

Some units are obvious so space is not wasted by including them.
Therefore:

RR: bpm

HR: bpm

Temp: °C

CI

SVRI

# Tautomerism

**Tautomerism** midazolam thiopentone keto-enol flip.

# Temperature measurement

**Temperature measurement** can be non-electrical or electrical.

*Non-electrical:*

\- liquid expansion (expansion is non-linear because fluid expansion is
offset by increase in **SVP** , so the column is tapered or the
gradations are non-linear):

o alcohol (boiling point=79°C)

o mercury (melting point=-39°C)

\- gauge:

o **Bourdon gauge** because P α T

o **bimetallic strip**

\- liquid crystal display

\- Infra-red

*Electrical:*

\- **Thermocouple**

\- **Thermistor**

\- Platinum wire resistor

# Tetanus

**Tetanus** caused by the spore-forming anaerobe *Clostridium tetani* ,
which produces tetanus toxin. Toxin is transported from site of
infection to spinal cord by retrograde axonal transport, where it
cleaves membrane proteins that are involved in exocytosis, primarily in
inhibitory interneurones. This causes disinhibition of motor and
autonomic neurones and increased muscle tone, spasms and autonomic
instability. Trismus, opisthotonus and risus sardonicus are often found.
Apnoeas are caused by generalised tetanic spasms.

Differential diagnosis:

Acute dystonic reactions

Dental infection (causing trismus)

Strychnine poisoning

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome

# Tetralogy of Fallot

**Tetralogy of Fallot** Cyanotic congenital heart defect. Ccomprises
pulmonary stenosis, right ventricular hypertrophy, overriding aorta, and
ventricular septal defect.

# Therapeutic index

**Therapeutic index** is the ratio of the toxic dose to the therapeutic
dose. For consistency, these are taken as the TD <sub>50</sub> - the
dose at which 50% of *population* get toxicity and **ED <sub>50</sub>**
- the minimum dose to have desired effect in 50% of *population* .

Therapeutic index = TD <sub>50</sub> /ED <sub>50</sub>

# Thermoregulation

**Thermoregulation** Anaesthetised patients lose heat by:

<img src="images/image069.gif" width="68" height="50" />
<img src="images/image071.gif" width="141" height="71" />

NICE guidelines 2008:

Pre-op: Temp must be &gt; 36° before anaesthesia

Intra-op:

Monitor temp if:

o surgery &gt;30min

o temp &lt;36°

o ASA &gt;2

o GA+RA

Fluid warmer if:

\- &gt;500ml fluid

Post-op: warm if &lt;36°

\[xxx cite NICE + WARM\]

# Thiopentone

**Thiopentone** (see **barbiturates** , **intravenous anaesthetic
agents** ). Stored as the sodium salt, mixed with 6% sodium carbonate to
prevent the insoluble free acid from forming if exposed to
CO<sub>2</sub> .

# Third gas law

**Third gas law** (see **gas laws** ). Constant P, V varies as T.

# Third space

**Third space** 1 <sup>st</sup> and 2 <sup>nd</sup> spaces are intra-
and extra-cellular spaces. 3 <sup>rd</sup> space is outwith reach of
perfusion eg. gut lumen.

# Thromboembolism xxx

**Thromboembolism xxx**

Risk factors for recurrent DVT:

Classics:

\- Cancer

\- OCP

\- Surgery

\- Trauma

\- Pregnancy

Thrombophilias:

\- Protein C or S deficiency

\- Antithrombin III deficiency

\- Factor V Leiden

Blood clots make me BARPH:

\- *<span class="underline">B</span>* ehc(xxx)et's syndrome

\- *<span class="underline">A</span>* ntiphospholipid syndrome

\- *<span class="underline">R</span>* enal failure: nephrotic syndrome

\- *<span class="underline">P</span>* aroxysmal nocturnal
haemoglobinuria

\- *<span class="underline">H</span>* yperhomocysteinaemia (NB **N
<sub>2</sub> O** )

# Thyroid hormones

**Thyroid hormones** are systhesised …xxx

Iodine → iodide (carbimazole inhibits)

Mono- and Di-iodothryronine synthesised from Tyrosine

Pair of MIT and DIT combined by thyroid peroxidase (propylthiouracil
inhibits)

T4 and T3 released. Peripheral conversion T4 to more active T3
(inhibited by propanolol).

Give iv T3 to treat thryroid crisis.

Amiodarone causes hypothyroidism initially by precipitating the
Wolff-Chaikoff effect, which causes decreased synthesis of thyroid
hormones in context of a large iodine load.

# Tocolytics

**Tocolytics**

β2-agonists salbutamol

Nitrates GTN

Anaesthetic agents

MgSO <sub>4</sub> - no evidence of a clinically useful effect (Cochrane)

Ca++ channel blockers - nifedipine

COX-inhibition - indomethacin - safety unclear, don't use after 32/40
due to PDA

Oxytocin antagonists - Atociban - no clinical evidence (yet)

# Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA)

**Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA)**

Propofol infusion rate 4-12mg/kg/hr; target Cp = 4-6 μg/ml for surgical
anaesthesia.

Bolus technique - induction with 2.5mg/kg then boluses of 1mg/kg at
6minute intervals - results in Cp 2.5-7.5 μg/ml.

Remifentanil

Surgical anaesthesia: &gt; 2 **n** g/ml

Intubation: 4-6 ng/ml.

Or infusion 0.05 - 0.2 μg/kg/min.

# Transmembrane channels

**Transmembrane channels**

NB NMDA receptor may be an exception…

# Transplant

**Transplant** (see **Immunosuppression** )

# Tricyclic antidepressants

**Tricyclic antidepressants** (see **antidepressants** ). Toxicity is
primarily mediated through Type 1a **antiarrythmic** action.
**Anticholinergic** signs are present, and sedation results from
antihistamine action. Sudden deterioration is common.

QRS duration QRS &gt;100ms predicts arrhythmia. Also S <sub>1</sub>
pattern, R wave in AVR.

Management centres on aggressive cardiovascular resuscitation with
fluid, NaHCO <sub>3</sub> , and noradrenaline to maintain MAP.

NaHCO <sub>3</sub> narrows the QRS complex and improves blood pressure.
The probable mechanism is an increase in the neutral form of the TCA,
which reduces binding to Na <sup>+</sup> channels.

# Trigeminal nerve

**Trigeminal nerve** (CN V) supplies sensation to the face and motor
fibres to the muscles of mastication. It passes intracranially to the
Gasserian ganglion, which lies within the cranium at the posterior base
of the zygomatic arch. Three sensory branches leave the ganglion:

(see **base of skull** and **eye** )

# Trigeminal neuralgia

**Trigeminal neuralgia** sudden, episodic, unilateral lancinating pain
in the distribution of one or more branches of the **trigeminal nerve**
. Extreme severity; suicide is reported. Drug treatment is with
**anticonvulsants** such as carbamazepine, gabapentin, phenytoin.
Baclofen is also used. None are very effective. Surgical treatment
includes craniotomy for microvascular decompression in which the root of
the trigeminal nerve is released from compression by blood vessels such
as an ecstatic superior cerebellar artery. 90% of patients have complete
resolution of symptoms immediately after this.

# Triple point

**Triple point** The temperature and pressure at which the gas, liquid
and solid forms of a substance exist in equilibrium.

# TUR syndrome

**TUR syndrome** caused by absorption of isotonic glycine solution used
for irrigation during TUR procedures. Hypotension and bradycardia occur,
and hyponatraemia leading to cerebral oedema and seizures.

# TURP (transurethral resection of the prostate)

**TURP (transurethral resection of the prostate)** estimated blood loss
is between 10 and 20mls per gram of prostate resected. Irrigation fluid
at a height of 1m enters venous sinuses in the prostate at a rate of
20-60ml/min. This may lead to **TUR syndrome** .

# Ulnar nerve

**Ulnar nerve** arises from the medial cord of the **brachial plexus** .
It lies medial to the axillary artery and the brachial artery until the
lower third of the humerus, when it follows the medial head of triceps
and passes behind the medial epicondyle in the ulnar groove (the
funnybone). In the forearm it lies deep to flexor carpi ulnaris, and
lateral to the ulnar artery.
<img src="images/image072.gif" alt="Text Box: Lateral two lumbricals Opponens pollicis Abductor pollicis brevis Flexor pollicis brevis " width="85" height="46" />

The ulnar nerve supplies all small muscles of the hand with the
exception of the LOAF muscles.

# Ultrasound

**Ultrasound** is sound frequency too high to be audible by humans
(&gt;20kHz). Higher frequency means shorter **wavelength** , which means
higher resolution but less penetration. Ultrasound is generated by
*piezoelectric* crystals which vibrate when a voltage is put across
them. The same crystals convert the reflected sound waves into a votage
signal. (Ultrasound probes transmit for about 1μsec and then receive for
about 1msec.)

Two pieces of information are extracted from the wave:

1. The time delay before the reflected wave is detected - this depends
on the *distance* travelled

2. The intensity of the wave - this depends on the echo-reflectivity of
the tissue.

# Units

**Units** In the SI system, there are 7 base units:

Potential difference = power/current = current\*resistance
(Haemodynamics: Pressure difference = flow\*resistance).

Work = force\*distance (Physiology: work = pressure\*volume

Charge is number of electrons xxx. 1 coulomb is quantity of charge
passing a single point when 1A flows for 1s. (=6x10 <sup>18</sup>
electrons).

Capacitance = charge/voltage. 1 farad is one coulomb stored per volt
applied.(Haemodynamics: Capacitance = volume stored/pressure.)

Energy stored in a capacitor = ½CV <sub>2</sub>

Force = mass \* acceleration. 1 Newton is the force required to
accelerate a mass of 1kg at 1m/s <sup>2</sup> .

Energy= work = force x distance. 1J = 1Nm. 1 Joule is the energy
expended when an object subjected to a force of 1N moves 1m in the
direction of the force. (Work=F\*d).

Power = energy/time. 1W=1J/s.

# Uptake

**Uptake** of volatile agents depends on 7 factors:

1.

CO

Patient factors

2.

VA

3.

Solubility

Agent Factors

4.

Concentration

5.

Second gas effect

Dynamic effects

6.

Concentration effect

7.

(Metabolism/loss.)

# V/Q equation

At **steady state** , mass of oxygen taken up from alveoli equals mass
of oxygen taken up by blood:

V <sub>A</sub> (F <sub>I</sub> O<sub>2</sub> -F <sub>A</sub>
O<sub>2</sub> ) = Q <sub>t</sub> (C <sub>a</sub> O<sub>2</sub> -C
<sub>v</sub> O<sub>2</sub> )

Therefore:

V <sub>A</sub> /Q <sub>t</sub> = (C <sub>a</sub> O<sub>2</sub> -C
<sub>v</sub> O<sub>2</sub> )/ (F <sub>I</sub> O<sub>2</sub> -F
<sub>A</sub> O<sub>2</sub> )

Xxx how does this get to:

V <sub>A</sub> /Q <sub>t</sub> =8.63\*(C <sub>a</sub> O<sub>2</sub> -C
<sub>v</sub> O<sub>2</sub> )/P <sub>A</sub> CO2

# Vacuum-insulated evaporators

**Vacuum-insulated evaporators** xxx

Store liquid oxygen at 10bar and below its critical temperature
(-119°C). 800x the volume of O2 gas is contained.

# Vagus nerve

**Vagus nerve** jugular foramen, carotid sheath, loops round Subclavian
(R) aorta (L)

# Valsalva manoeuvre

**Valsalva manoeuvre** forced expiration against a closed glottis.

<img src="images/image074.gif" width="178" height="214" />

Phase 1: aortic compression increases BP; reflex bradycardia

Phase 2: IVC compression decreases CO, therefore BP; reflex tachycardia
.

Phase 3: release of aortic compression decreases BP

Phase 4: normal CO pumped against constricted circulation causing
rebound hypertension.

# Valvular heart disease

**Valvular heart disease** xxx

Symptomatic or severe valvular heart disease is a major risk factor for
peri-operative death (see **cardiac risk** ). Basic principles are the
same for all forms: maintain coronary perfusion, maintain myocardial
contractility. Control preload, heart rate, and afterload.

See individual ones. xxx

# Vaporisers

**Vaporisers** xxx

Drawover - low resistance, may be in circuit

Plenum - high resistance, attached to back bar

Determinants of output concentration:

1. SVP of agent

2. Surface area of agent

3. Temperature

4. Duration of use

5. Flow rate

6. Flow characteristics within chamber

7. Splitting ratio

# Vapour

**Vapour** is matter in gaseous form below its **critical temperature**
.

# Vasopressim

VASST - hint of benefit if given early (in less severe shock); less renal injury.
VANISH -
VANCS - less acute renal failure after cardiac surgery; less atrial fibrillation vs norad.
IPDMA - VANISH, VASST, VANCS: no survival difference *at all*; significant reduction in RRT requirement, narrowly significant. More digital ischaemia, less arrythmia.

Modified Sgarbossa Criteria:
≥ 1 lead with ≥1 mm of concordant ST elevation
≥ 1 lead of V1-V3 with ≥ 1 mm of concordant ST depression
≥ 1 lead anywhere with ≥ 1 mm STE and proportionally excessive discordant STE, as defined by ≥ 25% of the depth of the preceding S-wave.

Urinary antigen tests available for:
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1.

Bellomo. TRPF para amino hippuric acid 1970s TRPF is elevated in sepsis. But efferent dilation is greater so decreased GFR. In sheep, reversed by angiotensin II.

Shunt vessels exist between afferent and efferent arterioles. Arne Lundquist 1970s. Ludwig 1911. "Ludwig's arteriole"

Kids at risk of hyponatraemia due to nonphysiological ADH secretion (very common indeed, caused by nausea/distress) and at risk of complications due to higher brain:box ratio.

Neuromuscular disorders
MND: ddx als, polio, West Nile, paraneoplastic
NMJ: ddx myasthenia, ELMS, botulism, organophosphate, snake bite

GBS: weakness, areflexia, tingling and pain. Usually ascending. But bulbar variants exist.
Complications - autonomic instability,
Ileus leading to stercoperforation and death. Neuropathic pain.
Sux hyperkalaemia
Ddx: transverse myelitis, heavy metal poisoning, other nmd disorders above

Rx.
IVIG. Pooled from thousands of donors. Give once. Causes AKI.
Plasma exchange
Early trache.
Don't push them too hard weaning
Wean at 15ml/kg (about a litre) vital capacity

Myasthenia gravis:
Fatiguability. Younger women, older men.
Normal reflexes, no sensory involvement.
15-20% thymoma.
Rx
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (if too much, SLUDGE) . Steroids, IVIG, plex. Azathioprine, rituximab

# VCO<sub>2</sub>

**VCO<sub>2</sub>**

# Venous drainage of brain

**Venous drainage of brain** Blood drains in superficial cerebral veins
to dural sinuses, and then to the jugular bulbs.

# Venous return

**Venous return** Physiological processes that regulate cardiac output
(eg. Angiotensin, sympathetic activation) do so in part (perhaps
primarily) by regulating **blood volume** and venous **capacitance.**

More visible effects such as increase in heart rate are a distraction.
XXX ref Guyton xxx read sharwood smith

# Ventilation (operating theatre)

**Ventilation (operating theatre)** Normally complete air change 15-20
times per hour. Under laminar flow ('room within a room') area, 400 air
changes per hour.

# Ventilatory response graphs

**Ventilatory response graphs**

<img src="images/image075.jpg" width="400" />

CO2 ventilatory response graph. Extrapolating the lines to zero finds
the *apnoeic threshold* . Awake subjects continue to breathe below this
due to the *wakefulness drive to breathing* . Confusion about this arose
because one over-represented group of awake experimental subjects
becomes apnoeic below the apnoeic threshold: conscious adult respiratory
physiologists.

# Venturi effect

**Venturi effect** dependent on **Bernoulli principle** .

# viruses

lipid enveloped: HIV HepB HepC



<!--
Learn

Abx, mero taz amox metro 
Inattention neglect 
Blood pressure aortic dissection 
Plateau pressure 
-->


# VO<sub>2</sub>

**VO<sub>2</sub>**

# Volatiles

**Volatiles** See **inhalational anaesthetic agents** .

# Volume of distribution (V <sub>D</sub> )

**Volume of distribution (V <sub>D</sub> )** The theoretical volume that
would accommodate the whole dose at the plasma concentration.

# Vomiting

**Vomiting** chemoreceptor trigger zone, vomiting centre, receptors,
anti-emetics.

# Warfarin

**Warfarin** inhibits vitamin K-mediated activation of clotting factors
2, 7, 9,and 10.

# Wavelength

**Wavelength** = velocity/frequency

# Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome

**Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome** Arrythmias in association with an
accessory conducting pathway (bundle of Kent) between atria and
ventricles. Prone to SVT, AF, or atrial flutter precipitated by
sympathetic activity. AF may cause VF. Pattern is in 0.2% of ECGs, but
syndrome (arrhythmia) only in 0.02% of people.
<img src="images/image078.gif" width="61" height="86" />

Type A: accessory on left side (gives tall **R wave in V <sub>1</sub>**
), Type B: accessory on right.

Orthodromic (narrow complex): aim to slow A-V node conduction. Vagal
manoeuvres, adenosine, procainamide.

Antidromic (broad complex): must treat as any broad-complex tachycardia
as diagnosis difficult. Procainamide.

AF: *avoid* drugs that slow A-V node conduction (eg adenosine,
verapamil) because they will increase transmission through accessory
pathway, potentially causing VF. Cardioversion is important. Flecainide
is often used.

# Work

**Work** is force x distance. This is the same as pressure x volume.

# Wright's respirometer

**Wright's respirometer** measures *volume* by xxx. It is not affected
by the composition of the gases, but is affected by moisture.

# Zero-order elimination

**Zero-order elimination** (dC/dt = k) is unusual (see
**pharmacokinetics** ). Fall in concentration over time is linear. It
tends to occur when a metabolic system is saturated, and leads to
accumulation of drug. Eg. Heparin, Aspirin, Phenytoin, and Ethanol.

